whewell | It is my purpose to write the History of some of the most important of the Physical Sciences, from the earliest to the most recent periods. | Introduction
whewell | The completeness of historical view which belongs to such a design, consists, not in accumulating all the details of the cultivation of each science, but in marking the larger features of its formation. | Introduction
whewell | The historian must endeavor to point out how each of the important advances was made, by which the sciences have reached their present position; and when and by whom each of the valuable truths was obtained, of which the aggregate now constitutes a costly treasure. | Introduction
whewell | Our species, from the time of its creation, has been travelling onwards in pursuit of truth; and now that we have reached a lofty and commanding position, with the broad light of day around us, it must be grateful to look back on the line of our vast progress. | Introduction
whewell | The examination of the steps by which our ancestors acquired our intellectual estate, may make us acquainted with our expectations as well as our possessions;--may not only remind us of what we have, but may teach us how to improve and increase our store. | Introduction
whewell | It will be universally expected that a History of Inductive Science should point out to us a philosophical distribution of the existing body of knowledge, and afford us some indication of the most promising mode of directing our future efforts to add to its extent and completeness. | Introduction
whewell | To deduce such lessons from the past history of human knowledge, was the intention which originally gave rise to the present work. | Introduction
whewell | In the first place then, I remark, that, to the formation of science, two things are requisite;--Facts and Ideas; observation of Things without, and an inward effort of Thought; or, in other words, Sense and Reason. | Introduction
whewell | Neither of these elements, by itself can constitute substantial general knowledge. | Introduction
whewell | Real speculative knowledge demands the combination of the two ingredients;--right reason, and facts to reason upon. | Introduction
whewell | It has been well said, that true knowledge is the interpretation of nature; and therefore it requires both the interpreting mind, and nature for its subject; both the document, and the ingenuity to read it aright. | Introduction
whewell | Thus invention, acuteness, and connection of thought, are necessary on the one hand, for the progress of philosophical knowledge; and on the other hand, the precise and steady application of these faculties to facts well known and clearly conceived. | Introduction
whewell | Such sciences as we have here to do with are, commonly, not formed by a single act;--they are not completed by the discovery of one great principle. | Introduction
whewell | The principles which constituted the triumph of the preceding stages of the science, may appear to be subverted and ejected by the later discoveries, but in fact they are (so far as they were true) taken up in the subsequent doctrines and included in them. | Introduction
whewell | They continue to be an essential part of the science. The earlier truths are not expelled but absorbed, not contradicted but extended; and the history of each science, which may thus appear like a succession of revolutions, is, in reality, a series of developments. | Introduction
whewell | The great changes which thus take place in the history of science, the revolutions of the intellectual world, have, as a usual and leading character, this, that they are steps of generalization; transitions from particular truths to others of a wider extent, in which the former are included. | Introduction
whewell | This progress of knowledge, from individual facts to universal laws,--from particular propositions to general ones,--and from these to others still more general, with reference to which the former generalizations are particular,--is so far familiar to men's minds. | Introduction
whewell | These primary movements, when the Inductive process, by which science is formed, has been exercised in a more energetic and powerful manner, may be distinguished as the Inductive Epochs of scientific history; and they deserve our more express and pointed notice. | Introduction
whewell | They have been preceded by a period, which we may call their Prelude during which the ideas and facts on which they turned were called into action;--were gradually evolved into clearness and connection, permanency and certainty. | Introduction
whewell | And again, when this step has been made by the principal discoverers, there may generally be observed another period, which we may call the Sequel of the Epoch, during which the discovery has acquired a more perfect certainty and a more complete development among the leaders of the advance. | Introduction
whewell | Since the advance of science consists in collecting by induction true general laws from particular facts, and in combining several such laws into one higher generalization, in which they still retain their truth; we might form a Chart, or Table, of the progress of each science. | Introduction
whewell | In order to understand the conditions of the progress of knowledge, we must attend, in some measure, to the failures as well as the successes by which such attempts have been attended. | Introduction
whewell | During a great part of such stationary periods, we shall find that the process which we have spoken of as essential to the formation of real science, the conjunction of clear Ideas with distinct Facts, was interrupted; and, in such cases, men dealt with ideas alone. | Introduction
whewell | This process of drawing conclusions from our principles, by rigorous and unimpeachable trains of demonstration, is termed Deduction. In its due place, it is a highly important part of every science; but it has no value when the fundamental principles, on which the whole of the demonstration rests, have not first been obtained by the induction of facts, so as to supply the materials of substantial truth. | Introduction
whewell | Without such materials, a series of demonstrations resembles physical science only as a shadow resembles a real object. To give a real significance to our propositions, Induction must provide what Deduction cannot supply. | Introduction
whewell | Scientific Ideas and common Notions differ in this, that the former are precise and stable, the latter vague and variable; the former are possessed with clear insight, and employed in a sense rigorously limited, and always identically the same; the latter have grown up in the mind from a thousand dim and diverse suggestions. | Introduction
whewell | Scientific Ideas can often be adequately exhibited for all the purposes of reasoning, by means of Definitions and Axioms; all attempts to reason by means of Definitions from common Notions, lead to empty forms or entire confusion. | Introduction
whewell | Such common Notions are sufficient for the common practical conduct of human life: but man is not a practical creature merely; he has within him a speculative tendency, a pleasure in the contemplation of ideal relations, a love of knowledge as knowledge. | Introduction
whewell | So long, however, as attempts are made to form sciences, without such a verification and realization of their fundamental ideas, there is, in the natural series of speculation, no self-correcting principle. | Introduction
whewell | A philosophy constructed on notions obscure, vague, and unsubstantial, and held in spite of the want of correspondence between its doctrines and the actual train of physical events, may long subsist, and occupy men's minds. | Introduction
whewell | The opinions of the Masters are the facts which the Disciples endeavor to reduce to unity, or to follow into consequences. A series of speculators who pursue such a course, may properly be termed a School, and their philosophy a School Philosophy. | Introduction
whewell | The physical philosophy of the Greek Schools was formed by looking at the material world through the medium of that common language which men employ to answer the common occasions of life. | Introduction
whewell | In general, nations have marked this portion of time by some word which has a reference to the returning circle of seasons and employments. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | Thus the Latin _annus_ signified a ring, as we see in the derivative _annulus_: the Greek term ἐνιαυτὸς implies something which _returns into itself_. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | But to make the same term imply a certain fixed number of days, we must know how many days the cycle of the seasons occupies; a knowledge which requires faculties and artifices beyond what we have already mentioned. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | This fact is not likely to be known to any nation except those which have advanced far beyond that which may be considered as the earliest scientific process which we can trace in the history of the human race, the formation of a method of designating the successive numbers to an indefinite extent, by means of names, framed according to the decimal, quinary, or vigenary scale. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | They would not obtain any accuracy on this head, till they had attended for a considerable time to the motions and places of the sun; circumstances which require more precision of notice than the general facts of the degrees of heat and light. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | The turning back of the sun, when he had reached the greatest distance to the south or to the north, as shown either by his rising or by his height at noon, would perhaps be the most observable of such circumstances. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | The risings and settings of the stars under these circumstances, or under others which are easily recognized, were, in countries where the sky is usually clear, employed at an early period to mark the seasons of the year. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | Even without any artificial measure of time or position, it was not difficult to carry observations of this kind to such a degree of accuracy as to learn from them the number of days which compose the year; and to fix the precise season from the appearance of the stars. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | A knowledge concerning the stars appears to have been first cultivated with the last-mentioned view, and makes its first appearance in literature with this for its object. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | By such means it was determined that the year consisted, at least, nearly, of 365 days. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | A year thus settled as a period of a certain number of days is called a _Civil Year_. It is one of the earliest discoverable institutions of States possessing any germ of civilization; and one of the earliest portions of human systematic knowledge is the discovery of the length of the civil year, so that it should agree with the natural year, or year of the seasons. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | In reality, by such a mode of reckoning as we have described, the circle of the seasons would not come round exactly. The real length of the year is very nearly 365 days and a quarter. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | The civil year would be found not to coincide with the year of the seasons; the beginning of the former would take place at different periods of the latter; it would _wander_ into various seasons, instead of remaining fixed to the same season; the term _year_, and any number of years, would become ambiguous: some correction, at least some comparison, would be requisite. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | The method which we employ, and which consists in reckoning an additional day at the end of February every fourth or _leap_ year, is an example of the principle of _intercalation_, by which the correction was most commonly made. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | The Egyptians, on the other hand, knowingly permitted their civil year to _wander_, at least so far as their religious observances were concerned. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | The month is not any exact number of days, being more than 29, and less than 30. The latter number was first tried, for men more readily select numbers possessing some distinction of regularity. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | A little further trial would show that months of 29 and 30 days alternately, would preserve, for a considerable period, this agreement. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | With this persuasion, a correct system of intercalation became a religious duty. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | The above rule of alternate months of 29 and 30 days, supposes the length of the months 29 days and a half, which is not exactly the length of a lunar month. Accordingly the Months and the Moon were soon at variance. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | The correction of this inaccuracy, however, was not pursued separately, but was combined with another object, the securing a correspondence between the lunar and solar years, the main purpose of all early cycles. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | There are 12 complete lunations in a year; which according to the above rule (of 29½ days to a lunation) would make 354 days, leaving 12¼ days of difference between such a lunar year and a solar year. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | The first cycle which produced any near correspondence of the reckoning of the moon and the sun, was the _Octaëteris_, or period of 8 years. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | This cycle, however, was imperfect. The duration of 99 lunations is something more than 2922 days; it is more nearly 2923½; hence in 16 years there was a deficiency of 3 days, with regard to the motions of the moon. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | But a much more exact cycle, independent of these, was discovered and introduced by Meton, 432 years B. C. This cycle consisted of 19 years, and is so correct and convenient, that it is in use among ourselves to this day. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | The near coincidence of the solar and lunar periods in this cycle of 19 years, was undoubtedly a considerable discovery at the time when it was first accomplished. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | It is most probable that the length of the month was obtained with some exactness by the observation of eclipses, at considerable intervals of time from each other; for eclipses are very noticeable phenomena, and must have been very soon observed to occur only at new and full moon. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | The exact length of a certain number of months being thus known, the discovery of a cycle which should regulate the calendar with sufficient accuracy would be a business of arithmetical skill, and would depend, in part, on the existing knowledge of arithmetical methods; but in making the discovery, a natural arithmetical sagacity was probably more efficacious than method. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | It is very possible that the _Cycle of Meton_ is correct more nearly than its author was aware, and nearly than he could ascertain from any evidence and calculation known to him. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | Meton's Cycle was corrected a hundred years later (330 B. C.), by Calippus, who discovered the error of it by observing an eclipse of the moon six years before the death of Alexander. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | The Metonic and Calippic periods undoubtedly imply a very considerable degree of accuracy in the knowledge which the astronomers, to whom they are due, had of the length of the month; and the first is a very happy invention for bringing the solar and lunar calendars into agreement. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | Considered as a part of the progress of our astronomical knowledge, improvements in the calendar do not offer many points to our observation, but they exhibit a few very important steps. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | Calendars which, belonging apparently to unscientific ages and nations, possess a great degree of accordance with the true motions of the sun and moon (like the solar calendar of the Mexicans, and the lunar calendar of the Greeks), contain the only record now extant of discoveries which must have required a great deal of observation, of thought, and probably of time. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | But cycles of correction, which are both short and close to exactness, like that of Meton, may perhaps be the original form of the knowledge which they imply; and certainly require both accurate facts and sagacious arithmetical reasonings. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | The discovery of such a cycle must always have the appearance of a happy guess, like other discoveries of laws of nature. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | Beyond this point, the interest of the study of calendars, as bearing on our subject, ceases: they may be considered as belonging rather to Art than to Science; rather as an application of a part of our knowledge to the uses of life, than a means or an evidence of its extension. | Preface to the Third Edition
whewell | WE have now to consider more especially a long and barren period, which intervened between the scientific activity of ancient Greece and that of modern Europe; and which we may, therefore, call the Stationary Period of Science. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | Our object requires rather that we should point out the general and distinguishing features of the intellect and habits of those times. We must endeavor to delineate the character of the Stationary Period, and, as far as possible, to analyze its defects and errors; and thus obtain some knowledge of the causes of its barrenness and darkness. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | We have already stated, that real scientific progress requires distinct general Ideas, applied to many special and certain Facts. In the period of which we now have to speak, men's Ideas were obscured; their disposition to bring their general views into accordance with Facts was enfeebled. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | They were thus led to employ themselves unprofitably, among indistinct and unreal notions. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | These characteristics of the stationary period, its obscurity of thought, its servility, its intolerant disposition, and its enthusiastic temper, will be treated of in the four following chapters, on the Indistinctness of Ideas, the Commentatorial Spirit, the Dogmatism, and the Mysticism of the Middle Ages. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | THAT firm and entire possession of certain clear and distinct general ideas which is necessary to sound science, was the character of the minds of those among the ancients who created the several sciences which arose among them. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | With the progress of such distinct ideas, the inductive sciences rise and flourish; with the decay and loss of such distinct ideas, these sciences become stationary, languid, and retrograde. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | When men merely repeat the terms of science, without attaching to them any clear conceptions;--when their apprehensions become vague and dim;--when they assent to scientific doctrines as a matter of tradition, rather than of conviction, on trust rather than on sight;--when science is considered as a collection of opinions, rather than a record of laws by which the universe is really governed;--it must inevitably happen, that men will lose their hold on the knowledge which the great discoverers who preceded them have brought to light. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | Such indistinctness and vacillation of thought appear to have prevailed in the stationary period, and to be, in fact, intimately connected with its stationary character. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | The fact, that mere Collections of the opinions of physical philosophers came to hold a prominent place in literature, already indicated a tendency to an indistinct and wandering apprehension of such opinions. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | To present such statements as an important part of physical philosophy, shows an erroneous and loose apprehension of its nature. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | Such diversities of opinion convey no truth; such a multiplicity of statements of what has been *said*, in no degree teaches us what *is*; such accumulations of indistinct notions, however vast and varied, do not make up one distinct idea. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | On the contrary, the habit of dwelling upon the verbal expressions of the views of other persons, and of being content with such an apprehension of doctrines as a transient notice can give us, is fatal to firm and clear thought: it indicates wavering and feeble conceptions, which are inconsistent with speculation. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | All such writers are worthless for all purposes of *science*, and their labors may be considered as dead works; they have in them no principle of philosophical vitality; they draw their origin and nutriment from the death of true physical knowledge; and resemble the swarms of insects that are born from the perishing carcass of some noble animal. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | But the indistinctness of thought which is so fatal a feature in the intellect of the stationary period, may be traced more directly in the works, even of the best authors, of those times. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | His reasoning is, however, totally at variance with mechanical ideas on any view of the problem. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | Such an assumption implies an entire absence of those distinct ideas of force and mechanical pressure, on which our perception of the identity or difference of different modes of action must depend;--of those ideas by the help of which Archimedes had been able to demonstrate the properties of the lever, and Stevinus afterwards discovered the true solution of the problem of the inclined plane. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | Thus his views were vague; he had no clear conception of mechanical action, and he tried a geometrical conjecture. This is not the way to real knowledge. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | Men's minds were busy in endeavoring to systematize the distinctions and subtleties of the Aristotelian school, concerning Motion and Power; and, being thus employed among doctrines in which there was involved no definite meaning capable of real exemplification, they, of course, could not acquire sound physical knowledge. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | The physical doctrines which they extracted from Aristotle were, in the course of time, built up into a regular system; and though these doctrines could not be followed into a practical application without introducing distinctions and changes, such as deprived the terms of all steady signification, the dogmas continued to be repeated, till the world was persuaded that they were self-evident. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | So long as these assertions were left uncontested and untried, men heard and repeated them, without perceiving the incongruities which they involved: and thus they long evaded refutation, amid the vague notions and undoubting habits of the stationary period. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | But when the controversies of Galileo's time had made men think with more acuteness and steadiness, it was discovered that many of these doctrines were inconsistent with themselves, as well as with experiment. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | They did not perceive that, if they considered the weight of the body as a power acting to produce motion, they must consider the body itself as offering a resistance to motion; and that the effect must depend on the proportion of the power to the resistance; in short, they had no clear idea of *accelerating force*. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | This defect runs through all their mechanical speculations, and renders them entirely valueless. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | Thus, if men had any distinct idea of mechanical action, they could not have accepted for a moment the fable of the Echineis or Remora, a little fish which was said to be able to stop a large ship merely by sticking to it. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | A very little advance in the power of thinking clearly on the force which it exerted in pulling, would have enabled the Romans to see that the ship and its rowers must pull the adhering fish by the hold the oars had upon the water. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | Perhaps it may serve to illustrate still further the extent to which, under the Roman empire, men's notions of mechanical relations became faint, wavered, and disappeared, if we observe the change which took place in architecture. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | All architecture, to possess genuine beauty, must be mechanically consistent. The decorative members must represent a structure which has in it a principle of support and stability. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | But to be content with colonnades and pediments, which, though they imitated the forms of the Grecian ones, were destitute of their mechanical truth, belonged to the decline of art; and showed that men had lost the idea of force, and retained only that of shape. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | The splendid remains of Palmyra, Balbec, Petra, exhibit endless examples of this kind of perverse inventiveness; and show us, very instructively, how the decay of art and of science alike accompany this indistinctness of ideas which we are now endeavoring to illustrate. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | If they had perceived distinctly that the astronomical theorist had merely to do with *relative* motions, they must have been led to see the possibility, at least, of the Copernican system; as the Greeks, at an earlier period, had already perceived it. We find no trace of this. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | The Arabs are in the habit of giving conclusions without demonstrations, precepts without the investigations by which they are obtained; as if their main object were practical rather than speculative,--the calculation of results rather than the exposition of theory. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | The same unsteadiness of ideas which prevents men from obtaining clear views, and steady and just convictions, on special subjects, may lead them to despair of or deny the possibility of acquiring certainty at all, and may thus make them skeptics with regard to all knowledge. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | Such skeptics are themselves men of indistinct views, for they could not otherwise avoid assenting to the demonstrated truths of science; and, so far as they may be taken as specimens of their contemporaries, they prove that indistinct ideas prevail in the age in which they appear. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | In the stationary period, moreover, the indefinite speculations and unprofitable subtleties of the schools might further impel a man of bold and acute mind to this universal skepticism, because they offered nothing which could fix or satisfy him. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | The skepticism which denies the evidence of the truths of which the best established physical sciences consist, must necessarily involve a very indistinct apprehension of those truths; for such truths, properly exhibited, contain their own evidence, and are the best antidote to this skepticism. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | But an incredulity or contempt towards the asserted truths of physical science may arise also from the attention being mainly directed to the certainty and importance of religious truths. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | If the Arabians, who, during the ages of which we are speaking, were the most eminent cultivators of science, entertained only such comparatively feeble and servile notions of its doctrines, it will easily be supposed, that in the Christendom of that period, where physical knowledge was comparatively neglected, there was still less distinctness and vividness in the prevalent ideas on such subjects. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | When the thoughts were thus intentionally averted from those ideas which natural philosophy involves, the ideas inevitably became very indistinct in their minds; and they could not conceive that any other persons could find, on such subjects, grounds of clear conviction and certainty. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | It is impossible to express more forcibly that absence of any definite notions on physical subjects which led to this tone of thought. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | With such habits of thought, we are not to be surprised if the relations resulting from the best established theories were apprehended in an imperfect and incongruous manner. | History of the Greek School Philosophy
whewell | One of the most important talents requisite for a discoverer, is the ingenuity and skill which devises means for rapidly testing false suppositions as they offer themselves. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | he never allowed the labor he had spent upon any conjecture to produce any reluctance in abandoning the hypothesis, as soon as he had evidence of its inaccuracy. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | The mystical parts of Kepler's opinions, as his belief in astrology, his persuasion that the earth was an animal, and many of the loose moral and spiritual as well as sensible analyses by which he represented to himself the powers which he supposed to prevail in the universe, do not appear to have interfered with his discovery, but rather to have stimulated his invention, and animated his exertions. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | where there are clear scientific ideas on one subject in the mind, it does not appear that mysticism on others is at all unfavorable to the successful prosecution of research. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | Kepler's talents were a kindly and fertile soil, which he cultivated with abundant toil and vigor; but with great scantiness of agricultural skill and implements. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | Weeds and the grain throve and flourished side by side almost undistinguished; and he gave a peculiar appearance to his harvest, by gathering and preserving the one class of plants with as much care and diligence as the other. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | The rule thus referred to is stated in the third Chapter of this fifth Book. 'It is,' he says, 'a most certain and exact thing that the proportion which exists between the periodic times of any two planets is precisely the sesquiplicate of the proportion of their mean distances; that is, of the radii of the orbits.' | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | This ex-post-facto obviousness of discoveries is a delusion to which we are liable with regard to many of the most important principles. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | In the case of Kepler, we may observe, that the process of connecting two classes of quantities by comparing their powers, is obvious only to those who are familiar with general algebraical views; and that in Kepler's time, algebra had not taken the place of geometry, as the most usual vehicle of mathematical reasoning. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | Kepler always sought his formal laws by means of physical reasonings; and these, though vague or erroneous, determined the nature of the mathematical connection which he assumed. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | In all these harmonic ratios there is not one true relation; in a crowd of ideas there is not one truth: he becomes a man after being a spirit of light. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | The numerical relations of Concords are so peculiar that we can easily suppose them to have other bearings than those which first offer themselves. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | Astronomy was now ripe for such a change. As soon as Copernicus had taught men that the orbits of the planets were to be referred to the sun, it obviously became a question, what was the true form of these orbits, and the rule of motion of each planet in its own orbit. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | We find, indeed, that this is the spirit in which the pursuit of knowledge is generally carried on with success; those men arrive at truth who eagerly endeavor to connect remote points of their knowledge, not those who stop cautiously at each point till something compels them to go beyond it. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | Copernicus, not knowing the value of what he possessed (his system), undertook to represent Ptolemy, rather than nature, to which, however, he had approached more nearly than any other person. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | My first error was, that the path of a planet is a perfect circle;--an opinion which was a more mischievous thief of my time, in proportion as it was supported by the authority of all philosophers, and apparently agreeable to metaphysics. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | The supposition of the oval had already been forced upon Purbach in the case of Mercury, and upon Reinhold in the case of the Moon. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | By the physical hypothesis, he meant the doctrine that the time of a planet's describing any part of its orbit is proportional to the distance of the planet from the sun, for which supposition, as we have said, he conceived that he had assigned physical reasons. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | What an absurdity on my part! as if libration in the diameter might not be a way to the ellipse! | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | His numerous and fanciful hypotheses had discharged their office, when they had suggested to him his many lines of laborious calculation, and encouraged him under the exertions and disappointments to which these led. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | The result of this work was the formal laws of the motion of Mars, established by a clear induction, since they represented, with sufficient accuracy, the best observations. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | The real verification of the new doctrine concerning the orbits and motions of the heavenly bodies was, of course, to be found in the construction of tables of those motions, and in the continued comparison of such tables with observation. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | Horrox, far more philosophically, argues against this opinion, though he allows that he is much embarrassed by the deviations. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | these errors of the tables are alternately in excess and defect; how could this constant compensation happen if they were casual? | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | But if we suppose the tables to be right in the mean motions, but wrong in the equations, these facts are just what must happen; since Saturn's inequalities are of long period, while those of the Moon are numerous, and rapidly changing. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | the doctrine, that all the apparent irregularities of the celestial motions are really regular, was one of great consequence to establish at this period of the science. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | Since the Divine Goodness has given us in Tycho an observer so exact that this error of eight minutes is impossible, we must be thankful to God for this, and turn it to account. And these eight minutes, which we must not neglect, will, of themselves, enable us to reconstruct the whole of astronomy. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | The discovery of Kepler's Laws, accompanied, as from the first they were, with a conviction that the relations thus brought to light were the effects and exponents of physical causes, led rapidly and irresistibly to the Mechanical Science of the skies. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | The Newtonians repelled the charge of dealing in occult causes; and, referring gravity to the will of the Deity, as the First Cause, assumed a superiority over those whose philosophy rested in second causes. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | Flamsteed at first listened with complacency to the promises of improvements in the Lunar Tables, which the new doctrines held forth, and was willing to assist Newton, and to receive assistance from him. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | He then declared to one of his correspondents, 'I have determined to lay these crotchets of Sir Isaac Newton's wholly aside.' | Greek Astronomy
whewell | Flamsteed, though a good observer, was no philosopher;--never understood by a Theory any thing more than a Formula which should predict results;--and was incapable of comprehending the object of Newton's theory, which was to assign causes as well as rules, and to satisfy the conditions of Mechanics as well as of Geometry. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | The reception of the Newtonian theory on the Continent, was much more tardy and unwilling than in its native island. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | In France, the Cartesian system had obtained a wide and popular reception, having been recommended by Fontenelle with the graces of his style; and its empire was so firm and well established in that country, that it resisted for a long time the pressure of Newtonian arguments. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | Indeed, the Newtonian opinions had scarcely any disciples in France, till Voltaire asserted their claims, on his return from England in 1728: until then, as he himself says, there were not twenty Newtonians out of England. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | The hold which the Philosophy of Descartes had upon the minds of his countrymen is, perhaps, not surprising. He really had the merit, a great one in the history of science, of having completely overturned the Aristotelian system, and introduced the philosophy of matter and motion. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | His hypothesis of vortices, as an explanation of the celestial motions, had an apparent advantage over the Newtonian doctrine, in this respect;--that it referred effects to the most intelligible, or at least most familiar kinds of mechanical causation, namely, pressure and impulse. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | Thus the Newtonian system was not adopted in France till the Cartesian generation had died off; Fontenelle, who was secretary to the Academy of Sciences, and who lived till 1756, died a Cartesian. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | Voltaire, who visited England in 1727, notices this difference in his lively manner. 'A Frenchman who arrives in London, finds a great alteration in philosophy, as in other things. He left the world full, he finds it empty.' | Greek Astronomy
whewell | It was Voltaire himself as we have said, who was mainly instrumental in giving the Newtonian doctrines currency in France. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | But Newton was not unknown or despised in France till this time. In 1699 he was admitted one of the very small number of foreign associates of the French Academy of Sciences. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | Even Fontenelle, who, as we have said, never adopted his opinions, spoke of him in a worthy manner, in the Eloge which he composed on the occasion of his death. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | The verification of the Law of Universal Gravitation as the governing principle of all cosmical phenomena, led, as we have already stated, to a number of different lines of research, all long and difficult. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | A perfect Lunar Theory, if the theory could be perfected, promised to supply a method of finding the Longitude of any place on the earth's surface; and thus the verification of a theory which professed to be complete in its foundations, was identified with an object of immediate practical use to navigators and geographers, and of vast acknowledged value. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | Newton had discovered the ground of this want of agreement. He had shown that the same force which produces the Evection, Variation, and Annual Equation, must produce also a long series of other Inequalities, of various magnitudes and cycles, which perpetually drag the moon before or behind the place where she would be sought by an astronomer who knew only of those principal and notorious inequalities. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | Halley's Tables of the Moon were printed in 1719 or 1720, but not published till after his death in 1749. They had been founded on Flamsteed's observations and his own. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | But Halley had long proposed a method, different from that of Newton, but marked by great ingenuity, for amending the Lunar Tables. He proposed to do this by the use of a cycle, which we have mentioned as one of the earliest discoveries in astronomy;--the Period of 223 lunations, or eighteen years and eleven days, the Chaldean Saros. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | The first great apparent deficiency in the agreement of the law of universal gravitation with astronomical observation, was removed by Clairaut's improved approximation to the theoretical Motion of the Moon's Apogee, in 1750; yet not till it had caused so much disquietude, that Clairaut himself had suggested a modification of the law of attraction. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | Finally, Tobias Mayer, an astronomer of Göttingen, having compared Euler's tables with observations, corrected them so successfully, that in 1753 he published Tables of the Moon, which really did possess the accuracy which Halley only flattered himself that he had attained. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | This public national acknowledgment of the practical accuracy of these Tables is, it will be observed, also a solemn recognition of the truth of the Newtonian theory, as far as truth can be judged of by men acting under the highest official responsibility, and aided by the most complete command of the resources of the skill and talents of others. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | The finding the Longitude is thus the seal of the moon's gravitation to the sun and earth; and with this occurrence, therefore, our main concern with the history of the Lunar Theory ends. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | The motions of the nodes and apsides of the satellites are a necessary part of the Newtonian theory; and even the Cartesian astronomers now required only data, in order to introduce these changes into their Tables. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | The form in which the question of the truth of the doctrine of universal gravitation now offers itself to the minds of astronomers, is this:--that it is taken for granted that it will account for the motions of the heavenly bodies, and the question is, with what supposed masses it will give the best account. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | The continually increasing accuracy of the table shows the truth of the fundamental assumption. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | Thus the satellites of Jupiter are not only disturbed by the sun, as the moon is, but also by each other, as the planets are. This mutual action gives rise to some very curious relations among their motions; which, like most of the other leading inequalities, were forced upon the notice of astronomers by observation before they were obtained by mathematical calculation. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | Thus, in 1756, Euler calculated the effect of the attractions of the planets on the earth (the prize-question of the French Academy of Sciences), and Clairaut soon after. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | Thus the secular inequalities of the celestial motions, like all the others, confirm the law of universal gravitation. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | And thus, as Laplace observes on this very occasion, the lot of this great discovery of gravitation is no less than this, that every apparent exception becomes a proof, every difficulty a new occasion of a triumph. And such, as he truly adds, is the character of a true theory,--of a real representation of nature. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | The solid establishment of the Newtonian theory is thus shown by the manner in which we take it for granted not only in our reasonings, but in our feelings. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | The admission of an eighth planet into the long-established list, was a notion so foreign to men's thoughts at that time, that other suppositions were first tried. The orbit of the new body was at first calculated as if it had been a comet running in a parabolic path. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | The first of these was discovered on the first day of this century by Piazzi, the astronomer at Palermo; but he had only begun to suspect its nature, and had not completed his third observation, when his labors were suspended by a dangerous illness. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | The second year of the nineteenth century also produced its planet. This was discovered by Dr. Olbers, a physician of Bremen, while he was searching for Ceres among the stars of the constellation Virgo. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | Thus it is impossible that an assertion, false to any amount which the existing state of observation can easily detect, should have any abiding prevalence in astronomy. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | In this favored branch of knowledge, the most recondite and delicate discoveries can no more suffer doubt or contradiction, than the most palpable facts of sense which the face of nature offers to our notice. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | The same scrupulous care and diligence in recording all that has hitherto been ascertained, has been extended to those departments of astronomy in which we have as yet no general principles which serve to bind together our acquired treasures. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | The business of constructing any science may be figured as the task of forming a road on which our reason can travel through a certain province of the external world. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | We have to throw a bridge which may lead from the chambers of our own thoughts, from our speculative principles, to the distant shore of material facts. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | But in all cases the abyss is too wide to be crossed, except we can find some intermediate points on which the piers of our structure may rest. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Mere facts, without connexion or law, are only the rude stones hewn from the opposite bank, of which our arches may, at some time, be built. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | But mere hypothetical mathematical calculations are only plans of projected structures; and those plans which exhibit only one vast and single arch, or which suppose no support but that which our own position supplies, will assuredly never become realities. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | We must have a firm basis of intermediate generalizations in order to frame a continuous and stable edifice. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | The number of observed laws and relations of the phenomena of sound, is already very great; and though the time may be distant, there seems to be no reason to despair of one day uniting them by clear ideas of mechanical causation. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | The historical sketch just given includes only such parts of acoustics as have been in some degree reduced to general laws and physical causes; and thus excludes much that is usually treated of under that head. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | These are parts of Theoretical Music, not of Acoustics; of the Philosophy of the Fine Arts, not of Physical Science. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | The science of Acoustics may, however, properly consider other differences of sound than those of acute and grave,--for instance, the *articulate* differences, or those by which the various letters are formed. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Some progress has been made in reducing this part of the subject to general rules; for though Kempelen's 'talking machine' was only a work of art, Mr. Willis's machine, which exhibits the relation among the vowels, gives us a law such as forms a step in science. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | We may, however, consider this instrument as a *phthongometer*, or measure of vowel quality; and in that point of view we shall have to refer to it again when we come to speak of such measures. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Thus Lavoisier, far more fortunate than most of those who had, in earlier ages, produced revolutions in science, saw his theory accepted by all the most eminent men of his time, and established over a great part of Europe within a few years from its first promulgation. | History of Mechanics
whewell | Lavoisier was thrown into prison on some wretched charge of having, in the discharge of a public office which he had held, adulterated certain tobacco; but in reality, for the purpose of confiscating his property. | History of Mechanics
whewell | The brutish idiot, whom the state of the country at that time had placed in the judgment-seat, told him that the republic wanted no sçavans. | History of Mechanics
whewell | He was dragged to the guillotine, May the 8th, 1794, and beheaded, in the fifty-second year of his age; a melancholy proof that, in periods of political ferocity, innocence and merit, private virtues and public services, amiable manners and the love of friends, literary fame and exalted genius, are all as nothing to protect their possessor from the last extremes of violence and wrong, inflicted under judicial forms. | History of Mechanics
whewell | Such a nomenclature made its way into general use the more easily, in that the want of such a system had already been severely felt; the names in common use being fantastical, arbitrary, and multiplied beyond measure. | History of Mechanics
whewell | The main features of this system are, a selection of the simplest radical words, by which substances are designated, and a systematic distribution of terminations, to express their relations. | History of Mechanics
whewell | In the preface to this volume, he apologizes for the great amount of the changes, and pleads the authority of Bergman, who had exhorted De Morveau 'to spare no improper names; those who are learned will always be learned, and those who are ignorant will thus learn sooner.' | History of Mechanics
whewell | The Lavoisierian theory also, wide as was the range of truth which it embraced, required some limitation and correction. | History of Mechanics
whewell | But the leading generalization of Lavoisier, that acidification was *always* combination with oxygen, was found untenable. | History of Mechanics
whewell | The new theory, after this period, obtained a clear superiority in the minds of philosophical chemists, and was further supported by new analogies. | History of Mechanics
whewell | The general laws of chemical combination announced by Mr. Dalton are truths of the highest importance in the science, and are now nowhere contested; but the view of matter as constituted of *atoms*, which he has employed in conveying those laws, and in expressing his opinion of their cause, is neither so important nor so certain. | History of Mechanics
whewell | This law may be considered as consisting of three parts, according to the above description of it;--that elements combine in *definite* proportions;--that these determining proportions operate *reciprocally*;--and that when, between the same elements, several combining proportions occur, they are related as *multiples*. | History of Mechanics
whewell | He conceived bodies as composed of atoms of their constituent elements, grouped, either one and one, or one and two, or one and three, and so on. | History of Mechanics
whewell | The consideration of bodies as consisting of compound atoms, each of these being composed of elementary atoms, naturally led to this law of multiple proportions. | History of Mechanics
whewell | Mr. Dalton's generalization was first suggested during his examination of olefiant gas and carburetted hydrogen gas; and was asserted generally, on the strength of a few facts, being, as it were, irresistibly recommended by the clearness and simplicity which the notion possessed. | History of Mechanics
whewell | The general doctrine of the atomic theory is now firmly established over the whole of the chemical world. | History of Mechanics
whewell | This law is the *theory of volumes*; namely, that gases unite together *by volume* in very simple and definite proportions. | History of Mechanics
whewell | This was, as Davy says, the true origin of all that has been done in electro-chemical science. | History of Mechanics
whewell | He had already conjectured, in 1802, that all decompositions might be *polar*; that is, that in all cases of chemical decomposition, the elements might be related to each other as electrically *positive* and *negative*; a thought which it was the peculiar glory of his school to confirm and place in a distinct light. | History of Mechanics
whewell | I drew the conclusion, *that the combinations and decompositions by electricity were referrible to the law of electrical attractions and repulsions*, and advanced the hypothesis, *that chemical and electrical attractions were produced by the same cause, acting in the one case on particles, in the other on masses; . . . and that the same property, under different modifications, was the cause of all the phenomena exhibited by different voltaic combinations.* | History of Mechanics
whewell | This was, as he truly said, in the memorandum written in his journal at the instant, 'a capital experiment.' | History of Mechanics
whewell | At this period, there might be noticed three great branches of speculation on this subject; *the theory of the pile*, *the theory of electrical decomposition*, and *the theory of the identity of chemical and electrical forces*; which last doctrine, however, was found to include the other two, as might have been anticipated from the time of its first suggestion. | History of Mechanics
whewell | It is very natural to suppose that the repellent and attractive energies are communicated from one particle to another of the same kind, so as to establish a conducting *chain* in the fluid; and that the locomotion takes place in consequence. | History of Mechanics
whewell | Mr. Faraday, who supplied what was wanting, justly notices this vagueness. | History of Mechanics
whewell | But this general view of the electrolytical process required to be pursued further, in order to explain the nature of the action. | History of Mechanics
whewell | He proved, by experiments upon a great variety of substances, of the most different kinds, that the electro-chemical action is definite in amount according to the measurement of the new instrument. | History of Mechanics
whewell | *They were no other than the atomic weights of the Daltonian theory*, which formed the climax of the previous ascent of chemistry; and thus here, as everywhere in the progress of science, the generalizations of one generation are absorbed in the wider generalizations of the next. | History of Mechanics
whewell | Thus the great principle of the identity of electrical and chemical action was completely established. | History of Mechanics
whewell | We must not omit to repeat here the moral which we wish to draw from all great discoveries, that they depend upon the combination of *exact facts* with *clear ideas*. | History of Mechanics
whewell | This conception of Chemical Affinity as a peculiar influence of force, which, acting in opposite directions, combines and resolves bodies;--which may be liberated and thrown into the form of a voltaic current, and thus be transferred to remote points, and applied in various ways; is essential to the understanding, as it was to the making, of these discoveries. | History of Mechanics
whewell | One grain of water will require for its decomposition as much electricity as would make a powerful flash of lightning. | History of Mechanics
whewell | The class of bodies which are capable of electrical decomposition is limited by a very remarkable law: they are such binary compounds only as consist of *single* proportionals of their elementary principles. | History of Mechanics
whewell | I have such conviction that the power which governs electro-decomposition and ordinary chemical attractions is the same; and such confidence in the overruling influence of those natural laws which render the former definite, as to feel no hesitation in believing that the latter must submit to them too. | History of Mechanics
whewell | The epoch of establishment of the electro-chemical theory, like other great scientific epochs, must have its sequel, the period of its reception and confirmation, application and extension. | History of Mechanics
whewell | Our history of chemistry is, therefore, here at an end. I have, as far as I could, executed my task; which was, to mark all the great steps of its advance, from the most unconnected facts and the most imperfect speculations, to the highest generalization at which chemical philosophers have yet arrived. | History of Mechanics
whewell | We see that life is accompanied and sustained by many processes, which at first offer themselves to our notice as separate functions, however they may afterwards be found to be connected and identified; such are feeling, digestion, respiration, the action of the heart and pulse, generation, perception, voluntary motion. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | The analysis of any one of these functions may be pursued separately. And since in this, as in all genuine sciences, our knowledge becomes real and scientific, only in so far as it is verified in particular facts, and thus established in general propositions, such an original separation of the subjects of research is requisite to a true representation of the growth of real knowledge. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | The loose hypotheses and systems, concerning the connexion of different vital faculties and the general nature of living things, which have often been promulgated, must be excluded from this part of our plan. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | We do not deny all value and merit to such speculations; but they cannot be admitted in the earlier stages of the history of physiology, treated of as an inductive science. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | If the doctrine so propounded have a solid and permanent truth, they will again come before us when we have travelled through the range of more limited truths, and are prepared to ascend with security and certainty into the higher region of general physiological principles. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | If they cannot be arrived at by such a road, they are then, however plausible and pleasing, no portion of that real and progressive science with which alone our history is concerned. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | We proceed, therefore, to trace the establishment of some of the more limited but certain doctrines of physiology. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | IN the earliest conceptions which men entertained of their power of moving their own members, they probably had no thought of any mechanism or organization by which this was effected. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | The foot and the hand, no less than the head, were seen to be endowed with life; and this pervading life seemed sufficiently to explain the power of motion in each part of the frame, without its being held necessary to seek out a special seat of the will, or instruments by which its impulses were made effective. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | But the slightest inspection of dissected animals showed that their limbs were formed of a curious and complex collection of cordage, and communications of various kinds, running along and connecting the bones of the skeleton. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | These cords and communications we now distinguish as muscles, nerves, veins, arteries, &c.; and among these, we assign to the muscles the office of moving the parts to which they are attached, as cords move the parts of a machine. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | Though this action of the muscles on the bones may now appear very obvious, it was, probably, not at first discerned. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | It is observed that Homer, who describes the wounds which are inflicted in his battles with so much apparent anatomical precision, nowhere employs the word _muscle_. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | And even Hippocrates of Cos, the most celebrated physician of antiquity, is held to have had no distinct conception of such an organ. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | He always employs the word _flesh_ when he means _muscle_, and the first explanation of the latter word (μῦς) occurs in a spurious work ascribed to him. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | For nerves, sinews, ligaments, he used indiscriminately the same terms; (τόνος or νεῦρον;) and of these nerves (νεῦρα) he asserts that they contract the limbs. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | Nor do we find much more distinctness on this subject even in Aristotle, a generation or two later. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | "The origin of the νεῦρα," he says, "is from the heart; they connect the bones, and surround the joints." | Physical Astronomy
whewell | It is clear that he means here the muscles, and therefore it is with injustice that he has been accused of the gross error of deriving the nerves from the heart. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | And he is held to have really had the merit of discovering the nerves of sensation, which he calls the "canals of the brain" (πόροι τοῦ ἐγκεφάλου); but the analysis of the mechanism of motion is left by him almost untouched. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | Perhaps his want of sound mechanical notions, and his constant straining after verbal generalities, and systematic classifications of the widest kind, supply the true account of his thus missing the solution of one of the simplest problems of Anatomy. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | In this, however, as in other subjects, his immediate predecessors were far from remedying the deficiencies of his doctrines. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | Those who professed to study physiology and medicine were, for the most part, studious only to frame some general system of abstract principles, which might give an appearance of connexion and profundity to their tenets. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | In this manner the successors of Hippocrates became a medical school, of great note in its day, designated as the _Dogmatic_ school; in opposition to which arose an _Empiric_ sect, who professed to deduce their modes of cure, not from theoretical dogmas, but from experience. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | These rival parties prevailed principally in Asia Minor and Egypt, during the time of Alexander's successors,--a period rich in names, but poor in discoveries; and we find no clear evidence of any decided advance in anatomy, such as we are here attempting to trace. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | The victories of Lucullus and Pompeius, in Greece and Asia, made the Romans acquainted with the Greek philosophy; and the consequence soon was, that shoals of philosophers, rhetoricians, poets, and physicians streamed from Greece, Asia Minor, and Egypt, to Rome and Italy, to traffic their knowledge and their arts for Roman wealth. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | Among these, was one person whose name makes a great figure in the history of medicine, Asclepiades of Prusa in Bithynia. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | This man appears to have been a quack, with the usual endowments of his class;--boldness, singularity, a contemptuous rejection of all previously esteemed opinions, a new classification of diseases, a new list of medicines, and the assertion of some wonderful cures. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | He would not, on such accounts, deserve a place in the history of science, but that he became the founder of a new school, the _Methodic_, which professed to hold itself separate both from the Dogmatics and the Empirics. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | I have noticed these schools of medicine, because, though I am not able to state distinctly their respective merits in the cultivation of anatomy, a great progress in that science was undoubtedly made during their domination, of which the praise must, I conceive, be in some way divided among them. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | The amount of this progress we are able to estimate, when we come to the works of Galen, who flourished under the Antonines, and died about A.D. 203. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | The following passage from his works will show that this progress in knowledge was not made without the usual condition of laborious and careful experiment, while it implies the curious fact of such experiment being conducted by means of family tradition and instruction, so as to give rise to a _caste_ of dissectors. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | In the opening of his Second Book _On Anatomical Manipulations_, he speaks thus of his predecessors: "I do not blame the ancients, who did not write books on anatomical manipulation; though I praise Marinus, who did. For it was superfluous for them to compose such records for themselves or others, while they were, from their childhood, exercised by their parents in dissecting, just as familiarly as in writing and reading; so that there was no more fear of their forgetting their anatomy, than of forgetting their alphabet." | Physical Astronomy
whewell | But when grown men, as well as children, were taught, this thorough discipline fell off; and, the art being carried out of the family of the Asclepiads, and declining by repeated transmission, books became necessary for the student. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | That the general structure of the animal frame, as composed of bones and muscles, was known with great accuracy before the time of Galen, is manifest from the nature of the mistakes and deficiencies of his predecessors which he finds it necessary to notice. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | Thus he observes, that some anatomists have made one muscle into two, from its having two heads;--that they have overlooked some of the muscles in the face of an ape, in consequence of not skinning the animal with their own hands;--and the like. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | Such remarks imply that the current knowledge of this kind was tolerably complete. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | Galen's own views of the general mechanical structure of an animal are very clear and sound. The skeleton, he observes, discharges the office of the pole of a tent, or the walls of a house. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | With respect to the action of the muscles, his views were anatomically and mechanically correct; in some instances, he showed what this action was, by severing the muscle. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | He himself added considerably to the existing knowledge of this subject; and his discoveries and descriptions, even of very minute parts of the muscular system, are spoken of with praise by modern anatomists. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | We may consider, therefore, that the doctrine of the muscular system, as a collection of cords and sheets, by the contraction of which the parts of the body are moved and supported, was firmly established, and completely followed into detail, by Galen and his predecessors. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | But there is another class of organs connected with voluntary motion, the nerves, and we must for a moment trace the opinions which prevailed respecting these. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | Aristotle, as we have said, noticed some of the nerves of sensation. But Herophilus, who lived in Egypt in the time of the first Ptolemy, distinguished nerves as the organs of the will, and Rufus, who lived in the time of Trajan, divides the nerves into sensitive and motive, and derives them all from the brain. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | But this did not imply that men had yet distinguished the nerves from the muscles. Even Galen maintained that every muscle consists of a bundle of nerves and sinews. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | But the important points, the necessity of the nerve, and the origination of all this apparatus of motion from the brain, he insists upon with great clearness and force. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | Thus he proved the necessity experimentally, by cutting through some of the bundles of nerves, and thus preventing the corresponding motions. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | And it is, he says, allowed by all, both physicians and philosophers, that where the origin of the nerve is, there the seat of the soul (ἡγημονικὸν τῆς ψυχῆς) must be: now this, he adds, is in the brain, and not in the heart. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | Thus the general construction and arrangement of the organization by which voluntary motion is effected, was well made out at the time of Galen, and is found distinctly delivered in his works. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | We cannot, perhaps, justly ascribe any large portion of the general discovery to him: indeed, the conception of the mechanism of the skeleton and muscles was probably so gradually unfolded in the minds of anatomical students, that it would be difficult, even if we knew the labors of each person, to select one, as peculiarly the author of the discovery. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | But it is clear that all those who did materially contribute to the establishment of this doctrine, must have possessed the qualifications which we find in Galen for such a task; namely, clear mechanical views of what the tensions of collections of strings could do, and an exact practical acquaintance with the muscular cordage which exists in the animal frame;--in short, in this as in other instances of real advance in science, there must have been clear ideas and real facts, unity of thought and extent of observation, brought into contact. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | The discovery of the Sivatherium supplies no particle of proof to the hypothesis, that the existing species of animals are descended from extinct creatures which are specifically distinct | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | we cannot act more wisely than in listening to the advice of that eminent naturalist, M. de Blainville. "Against this hypothesis, which, up to the present time, I regard as purely gratuitous, and likely to turn geologists out of the sound and excellent road in which they now are, I willingly raise my voice, with the most absolute conviction of being in the right." | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | All the best physiologists agree in declaring that such an extraordinary developement of the embryo is inconsistent with physiological possibility. | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | All palætiological sciences, all speculations which attempt to ascend from the present to the remote past, by the chain of causation, do also, by an inevitable consequence, urge us to look for the beginning of the state of things which we thus contemplate | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | in none of these cases have men been able, by the aid of science, to arrive at a beginning which is homogeneous with the known course of events. | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | When our thoughts would apprehend steadily the creation of things, we find that we are obliged to summon up other ideas than those which regulate the pursuit of scientific truths;--to call in other powers than those to which we refer natural events | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | Geology, forming one of the palætiological class of sciences, which trace back the history of the earth and its inhabitants on philosophical grounds, is thus associated with a number of other kinds of research | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | Our geological dynamics, like our astronomical dynamics, may be inadequate to carry us back to an origin of that state of things, of which it explains the progress: but this deficiency must be supplied, not by adding supernatural to natural geological dynamics, but by accepting, in their proper place, the views supplied by a portion of knowledge of a different character and order. | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | If we include in our Theology the speculations to which we have recourse for this purpose, we must exclude from them our Geology. | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | The two sciences may conspire, not by having any part in common: but because, though widely diverse in their lines, both point to a mysterious and invisible origin of the world. | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | He who believes that a Providence has ruled the affairs of mankind, will also believe that a Providence has governed the material world. | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | All truths must be consistent with all other truths, and that therefore the results of true geology or astronomy cannot be irreconcileable with the statements of true theology. | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | it by no means follows that we must be able to obtain a full insight into the nature and manner of such a consistency. | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | One of the advantages of the study of the history and nature of science in which we are now engaged is, that it warns us of the hopeless and presumptuous character of such attempts to understand the government of the world by the aid of science, without throwing any discredit upon the reality of our knowledge | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | it shows how solid and certain each science is, so long as it refers its own facts to its own ideas, it confines each science within its own limits, and condemns it as empty and helpless, when it pronounces upon those subjects which are extraneous to it. | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | The error of persons who should seek a geological narrative in theological records, would be rather in the search itself than in their interpretation of what they might find | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | geology and astronomy are, of themselves, incapable of giving us any distinct and satisfactory account of the origin of the universe, or of its parts. | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | That they were, like our own animal and vegetable contemporaries, profoundly adapted to the condition in which they were placed, we have ample reason to believe; but when we inquire whence they came into this our world, geology is silent. | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | The mystery of creation is not within the range of her legitimate territory; she says nothing, but she points upwards. | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | The bare conviction that a creation of species has taken place, whether once or many times, so long as it is unconnected with our organical sciences, is a tenet of Natural Theology rather than of Physical Philosophy. | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | The extent, therefore, to which natural causes may account for the extinction of species, will depend upon the amount of change which we suppose in the physical conditions of the earth. | Additions to the Third Edition
whewell | in the mean time, for the mode in which new species come into the places of those which are extinguished, we have (as we have seen) no hypothesis which physiology can, for a moment, sanction. | Additions to the Third Edition