whewell | IT is my purpose to write the History of some of the most important of the Physical Sciences, from the earliest to the most recent periods. | Introduction
whewell | I shall thus have to trace some of the most remarkable branches of human knowledge, from their first germ to their growth into a vast and varied assemblage of undisputed truths. | Introduction
whewell | The completeness of historical view which belongs to such a design, consists, not in accumulating all the details of the cultivation of each science, but in marking the larger features of its formation. | Introduction
whewell | The historian must endeavor to point out how each of the important advances was made, by which the sciences have reached their present position. | Introduction
whewell | Such a task, if fitly executed, must have a well-founded interest for all those who look at the existing condition of human knowledge with complacency and admiration. | Introduction
whewell | The present generation finds itself the heir of a vast patrimony of science; and it must needs concern us to know the steps by which these possessions were acquired. | Introduction
whewell | Our species, from the time of its creation, has been travelling onwards in pursuit of truth; and now that we have reached a lofty and commanding position, with the broad light of day around us, it must be grateful to look back on the line of our vast progress. | Introduction
whewell | The historian of science, from early periods to the present times, may hope for favor on the score of the mere subject of his narrative, and in virtue of the curiosity which the men of the present day may naturally feel respecting the events and persons of his story. | Introduction
whewell | But such a survey may possess also an interest of another kind; it may be instructive as well as agreeable; it may bring before the reader the present form and extent, the future hopes and prospects of science, as well as its past progress. | Introduction
whewell | The examination of the steps by which our ancestors acquired our intellectual estate, may make us acquainted with our expectations as well as our possessions. | Introduction
whewell | It will be universally expected that a History of Inductive Science should point out to us a philosophical distribution of the existing body of knowledge, and afford us some indication of the most promising mode of directing our future efforts to add to its extent and completeness. | Introduction
whewell | To deduce such lessons from the past history of human knowledge, was the intention which originally gave rise to the present work. | Introduction
whewell | It is not possible, without entering into this philosophy, to explain adequately how science which is INDUCTIVE differs from that which is not so; or why some portions of knowledge may properly be selected from the general mass and termed SCIENCE. | Introduction
whewell | It will be sufficient at present to say, that the sciences of which we have here to treat, are those which are commonly known as the Physical Sciences. | Introduction
whewell | By Induction is to be understood that process of collecting general truths from the examination of particular facts, by which such sciences have been formed. | Introduction
whewell | In the first place then, I remark, that, to the formation of science, two things are requisite;--Facts and Ideas; observation of Things without, and an inward effort of Thought; or, in other words, Sense and Reason. | Introduction
whewell | Neither of these elements, by itself can constitute substantial general knowledge. | Introduction
whewell | The impressions of sense, unconnected by some rational and speculative principle, can only end in a practical acquaintance with individual objects. | Introduction
whewell | The operations of the rational faculties, on the other hand, if allowed to go on without a constant reference to external things, can lead only to empty abstraction and barren ingenuity. | Introduction
whewell | Real speculative knowledge demands the combination of the two ingredients;--right reason, and facts to reason upon. | Introduction
whewell | It has been well said, that true knowledge is the interpretation of nature; and therefore it requires both the interpreting mind, and nature for its subject. | Introduction
whewell | Thus invention, acuteness, and connection of thought, are necessary on the one hand, for the progress of philosophical knowledge; and on the other hand, the precise and steady application of these faculties to facts well known and clearly conceived. | Introduction
whewell | The facts, the impressions on the senses, on which the first successful attempts at physical knowledge proceeded, were as well known long before the time when they were thus turned to account, as at that period. | Introduction
whewell | The motions of the stars, and the effects of weight, were familiar to man before the rise of the Greek Astronomy and Mechanics: but the 'diviner mind' was still absent. | Introduction
whewell | And even at this day, the tribes of uncivilized and half-civilized man, over the whole face of the earth, have before their eyes a vast body of facts, of exactly the same nature as those with which Europe has built the stately fabric of her physical philosophy. | Introduction
whewell | Almost the whole of the career of the Greek schools of philosophy; of the schoolmen of Europe in the middle ages; of the Arabian and Indian philosophers; shows us that we may have extreme ingenuity and subtlety, invention and connection, demonstration and method; and yet that out of these germs, no physical science may be developed. | Introduction
whewell | How impossible the formation of these sciences is without a constant and careful reference to observation and experiment;--how rapid and prosperous their progress may be when they draw from such sources the materials on which the mind of the philosopher employs itself;--the history of those branches of knowledge for the last three hundred years abundantly teaches us. | Introduction
whewell | Accordingly, the existence of clear Ideas applied to distinct Facts will be discernible in the History of Science, whenever any marked advance takes place. | Introduction
whewell | Such sciences as we have here to do with are, commonly, not formed by a single act;--they are not completed by the discovery of one great principle. | Introduction
whewell | On the contrary, they consist in a long-continued advance; a series of changes; a repeated progress from one principle to another, different and often apparently contradictory. | Introduction
whewell | Now, it is important to remember that this contradiction is apparent only. | Introduction
whewell | The principles which constituted the triumph of the preceding stages of the science, may appear to be subverted and ejected by the later discoveries, but in fact they are (so far as they were true) taken up in the subsequent doctrines and included in them. | Introduction
whewell | The earlier truths are not expelled but absorbed, not contradicted but extended; and the history of each science, which may thus appear like a succession of revolutions, is, in reality, a series of developments. | Introduction
whewell | Thus the final form of each science contains the substance of each of its preceding modifications; and all that was at any antecedent period discovered and established, ministers to the ultimate development of its proper branch of knowledge. | Introduction
whewell | The great changes which thus take place in the history of science, the revolutions of the intellectual world, have, as a usual and leading character, this, that they are steps of generalization; transitions from particular truths to others of a wider extent, in which the former are included. | Introduction
whewell | In our history, it is the progress of knowledge only which we have to attend to. | Introduction
whewell | These primary movements, when the Inductive process, by which science is formed, has been exercised in a more energetic and powerful manner, may be distinguished as the Inductive Epochs of scientific history; and they deserve our more express and pointed notice. | Introduction
whewell | They have been preceded by a period, which we may call their Prelude during which the ideas and facts on which they turned were called into action;--were gradually evolved into clearness and connection, permanency and certainty. | Introduction
whewell | And again, when this step has been made by the principal discoverers, there may generally be observed another period, which we may call the Sequel of the Epoch, during which the discovery has acquired a more perfect certainty and a more complete development among the leaders of the advance. | Introduction
whewell | To distribute the History of science into such Epochs, with their Preludes and Sequels, if successfully attempted, must needs make the series and connections of its occurrences more distinct and intelligible. | Introduction
whewell | Since the advance of science consists in collecting by induction true general laws from particular facts, and in combining several such laws into one higher generalization, in which they still retain their truth; we might form a Chart, or Table, of the progress of each science. | Introduction
whewell | The Table of the progress of any science would thus resemble the Map of a River, in which the waters from separate sources unite and make rivulets, which again meet with rivulets from other fountains, and thus go on forming by their junction trunks of a higher and higher order. | Introduction
whewell | Hence such an Inductive Table of each science would afford a criterion of the correctness of our distribution of the inductive Epochs, by its coincidence with the views of the best judges, as to the substantial contents of the science in question. | Introduction
whewell | When we reflect during how small a portion of the whole history of human speculations, science has really been, in any marked degree, progressive, we must needs feel some curiosity to know what was doing in these stationary periods. | Introduction
whewell | It is highly necessary to our purpose, to describe the baffled enterprises as well as the achievements of human speculation. | Introduction
whewell | During a great part of such stationary periods, we shall find that the process which we have spoken of as essential to the formation of real science, the conjunction of clear Ideas with distinct Facts, was interrupted. | Introduction
whewell | This process of drawing conclusions from our principles, by rigorous and unimpeachable trains of demonstration, is termed Deduction. | Introduction
whewell | In its due place, it is a highly important part of every science; but it has no value when the fundamental principles, on which the whole of the demonstration rests, have not first been obtained by the induction of facts, so as to supply the materials of substantial truth. | Introduction
whewell | Without such materials, a series of demonstrations resembles physical science only as a shadow resembles a real object. | Introduction
whewell | To give a real significance to our propositions, Induction must provide what Deduction cannot supply. | Introduction
whewell | are different directions in different places; that the sea, which seems so level, is, in fact, convex; that the earth, which appears to rest on a solid foundation, is, in fact, not supported at all; are great triumphs both of the power of discovering and the power of convincing. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | We may readily allow this, when we recollect how recently the doctrine of the antipodes, or the existence of inhabitants of the earth, who stand on the opposite side of it, with their feet turned towards ours, was considered both monstrous and heretical. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | Yet the different positions of the horizon at different places, necessarily led the student of spherical astronomy towards this notion of the earth as a round body. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | Anaximander is said by some to have held the earth to be globular, and to be detached or suspended; he is also stated to have constructed a sphere, on which were shown the extent of land and water. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | As, however, we do not know the arguments upon which he maintained the earth's globular form, we cannot judge of the value of his opinion; it may have been no better founded than a different opinion ascribed to him by Laertius, that the earth had the shape of a pillar. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | Probably, the authors of the doctrine of the globular form of the earth were led to it, as we have said, by observing the different height of the pole at different places. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | They would find that the space which they passed over from north to south on the earth, was proportional to the change of place of the horizon in the celestial sphere; and as the horizon is, at every place, in the direction of the earth's apparently level surface, this observation would naturally suggest to them the opinion that the earth is placed within the celestial sphere, as a small globe in the middle of a much larger one. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | We find this doctrine so distinctly insisted on by Aristotle, that we may almost look on him as the establisher of it. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | As to the figure of the earth, it must necessarily be spherical. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | And, moreover, from the phenomena according to the sense: for if it were not so, the eclipses of the moon would not have such sections as they have. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | For in the configurations in the course of a month, the deficient part takes all different shapes; it is straight, and concave, and convex; but in eclipses it always has the line of division convex; wherefore, since the moon is eclipsed in consequence of the interposition of the earth, the periphery of the earth must be the cause of this by having a spherical form. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | And again, from the appearances of the stars, it is clear, not only that the earth is round, but that its size is not very large: for when we make a small removal to the south or the north, the circle of the horizon becomes palpably different, so that the stars overhead undergo a great change, and are not the same to those that travel to the north and to the south. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | For some stars are seen in Egypt or at Cyprus, but are not seen in the countries to the north of these; and the stars that in the north are visible while they make a complete circuit, there undergo a setting. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | So that from this it is manifest, not only that the form of the earth is round, but also that it is a part of not a very large sphere: for otherwise the difference would not be so obvious to persons making so small a change of place. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | Wherefore we may judge that those persons who connect the region in the neighborhood of the pillars of Hercules with that towards India, and who assert that in this way the sea is ONE, do not assert things very improbable. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | They confirm this conjecture moreover by the elephants, which are said to be of the same species (γένος) towards each extreme; as if this circumstance was a consequence of the conjunction of the extremes. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | The mathematicians, who try to calculate the measure of the circumference, make it amount to 400,000 stadia; whence we collect that the earth is not only spherical, but is not large compared with the magnitude of the other stars. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | When this notion was once suggested, it was defended and confirmed by such arguments as we find in later writers: for instance, that the tendency of all things was to fall to the place of heavy bodies, and that this place being the centre of the earth, the whole earth had no such tendency. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | that the inequalities on the surface were so small as not materially to affect the shape of so vast a mass; that drops of water naturally form themselves into figures with a convex surface; that the end of the ocean would fall if it were not rounded off; that we see ships, when they go out to sea, disappearing downwards, which shows the surface to be convex. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | These are the arguments still employed in impressing the doctrines of astronomy upon the student of our own days; and thus we find that, even at the early period of which we are now speaking, truths had begun to accumulate which form a part of our present treasures. | Dedication and Preface
whewell | The philosopher, said he, is not the priest of a single religion, but of all the religions of the world. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | Accordingly, he composed hymns in honor of all the divinities of Greece, Rome, Egypt, Arabia;--Christianity alone was excluded from his favor. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | Although he finds much to admire in the Alexandrian philosophy, he declares that they were incapable of treating scientific questions. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | Plotinus denies that the reason of this is that the angles of vision become smaller. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | If it were so, he says, how could the heaven appear smaller than it is, since it occupies the whole of the visual angle? | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | Like all the kinds of Mysticism, this consists in the attempt to connect our conceptions of external objects by general and inappropriate notions of goodness, perfection, and relation to the divine essence and government. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | The subject which is thus dealt with, in the doctrines of which we now speak, is Number; a notion which tempts men into these visionary speculations more naturally than any other. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | For number is really applicable to moral notions--to emotions and feelings, and to their objects--as well as to the things of the material world. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | Moreover, by the discovery of the principle of musical concords, it had been found, probably most unexpectedly, that numerical relations were closely connected with sounds which could hardly be distinguished from the expression of thought and feeling. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | The relations of number have so wide a bearing, that the ramifications of such a suspicion could not easily be exhausted, supposing men willing to follow them into darkness and vagueness. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | Accordingly, this kind of speculation appeared very early, and showed itself first among the Pythagoreans, as we might have expected, from the attention which they gave to the theory of harmony. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | The mere mathematical relations of numbers,--as odd and even, perfect and imperfect, abundant and defective,--were, by a willing submission to an enthusiastic bias, connected with the notions of good and beauty. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | This number, indeed, which was known by the name of the Tetractys, was very celebrated in the school of Pythagoras. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | In Plato's works, we have evidence of a similar belief in religious relations of Number; and in the new Platonists, this doctrine was established as a system. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | Proclus, of whom we have been speaking, founds his philosophy, in a great measure, on the relation of Unity and Multiple. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | The intelligible and intellectual gods produce all things triadically; for the monads in these latter are divided according to number. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | And the intellectual gods produce all things hebdomically; for they evolve the intelligible, and at the same time intellectual triads, into intellectual hebdomads. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | In such examples we see how loosely space and number are combined or confounded by these mystical visionaries. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | Of all the forms which mysticism assumed, none was cultivated more assiduously than astrology. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | Although this art prevailed most universally and powerfully during the stationary period, its existence, even as a detailed technical system, goes back to a very early age. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | It probably had its origin in the East; it is universally ascribed to the Babylonians and Chaldeans. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | The name Chaldean was, at Rome, synonymous with mathematicus, or astrologer; and we read repeatedly that this class of persons were expelled from Italy by a decree of the senate. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | It is a class of men, says Tacitus, which, in our city, will always be prohibited, and will always exist. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | In Greece, it does not appear that the state showed any hostility to the professors of this art. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | They undertook, it would seem, then, as at a later period, to determine the course of a man's character and life from the configuration of the stars at the moment of his birth. | Greek School Philosophy
whewell | THE Third Law of Motion, whether expressed according to Newton's formula (by the equality of Action and Reaction), or in any other of the ways employed about the same time, easily gave the solution of mechanical problems in all cases of direct action; that is, when each body acted directly on others. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | But there still remained the problems in which the action is indirect; when bodies, in motion, act on each other by the intervention of levers, or in any other way. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | If a rigid rod, passing through two weights, be made to swing about its upper point, so as to form a pendulum, each weight will act and react on the other by means of the rod, considered as a lever turning about the point of suspension. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | What, in this case, will be the effect of this action and reaction? In what time will the pendulum oscillate by the force of gravity? | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | Where is the point at which a single weight must be placed to oscillate in the same time? in other words, where is the Centre of Oscillation? | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | That it was by no means easy to see in what manner the law of the communication of motion was to be extended from simpler cases to those where rotatory motion was produced, is shown by this; that Newton, in attempting to solve the mechanical problem of the Precession of the Equinoxes, fell into a serious error on this very subject. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | He assumed that, when a part has to communicate rotatory movement to the whole (as the protuberant portion of the terrestrial spheroid, attracted by the sun and moon, communicates a small movement to the whole mass of the earth), the quantity of the motion, 'motus,' will not be altered by being communicated. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | This principle is true, if, by motion, we understand what is called moment of inertia, a quantity in which both the velocity of each particle and its distance from the axis of rotation are taken into account: but Newton, in his calculations of its amount, considered the velocity only. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | The question of the centre of oscillation had been proposed by Mersenne somewhat earlier, in 1646. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | And though the problem was out of the reach of any principles at that time known and understood, some of the mathematicians of the day had rightly solved some cases of it, by proceeding as if the question had been to find the Centre of Percussion. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | The Centre of Percussion is the point about which the momenta of all the parts of a body balance each other, when it is in motion about any axis, and is stopped by striking against an obstacle placed at that centre. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | Huyghens was hardly advanced beyond boyhood when Mersenne first proposed this problem; and, as he says, could see no principle which even offered an opening to the solution, and had thus been repelled at the threshold. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | When, however, he published his Horologium Oscillatorium in 1673, the fourth part of that work was on the Centre of Oscillation or Agitation; and the principle which he then assumed, though not so simple and self-evident as those to which such problems were afterwards referred, was perfectly correct and general, and led to exact solutions in all cases. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | The 'hypothesis' assumed by Huyghens was this; 'that if any weights are put in motion by the force of gravity, they cannot move so that the centre of gravity of them all shall rise higher than the place from which it descended.' | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | This being assumed, it is easy to show that the centre of gravity will, under all circumstances, rise as high as its original position; and this consideration leads to a determination of the oscillation of a compound pendulum. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | We may observe, in the principle thus selected, a conviction that, in all mechanical action, the centre of gravity may be taken as the representative of the whole system. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | This conviction, as we have seen, may be traced in the axioms of Archimedes and Stevinus; and Huyghens, when he proceeds upon it, undertakes to show, that he assumes only this, that a heavy body cannot, of itself, move upwards. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | Clear as Huyghen's principle appeared to himself, it was, after some time, attacked by the Abbé Catelan, a zealous Cartesian. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | Catelan also put forth principles which he conceived were evident, and deduced from them conclusions contradictory to those of Huyghens. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | Huyghens easily showed that these suppositions would make the centre of gravity ascend to a greater height than that from which it fell; and after some time, James Bernoulli stept into the arena, and ranged himself on the side of Huyghens. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | As the discussion thus proceeded, it began to be seen that the question really was, in what manner the Third Law of Motion was to be extended to cases of indirect action; whether by distributing the action and reaction according to statical principles, or in some other way. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | I propose it to the consideration of mathematicians, says Bernoulli in 1686, what law of the communication of velocity is observed by bodies in motion, which are sustained at one extremity by a fixed fulcrum, and at the other by a body also moving, but more slowly. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | Is the excess of velocity which must be communicated from the one body to the other to be distributed in the same proportion in which a load supported on the lever would be distributed? | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | The principle, that the action and reaction of bodies thus moving are to be distributed according to the rules of the lever, is true; but Bernoulli mistook, in estimating this action and reaction by the velocity acquired at any moment; instead of taking, as he should have done, the increment of velocity which gravity tended to impress in the next instant. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | We may, from this time, consider as known, but not as fully established, the principle that 'When bodies in motion affect each other, the action and reaction are distributed according to the laws of Statics;' although there were still found occasional difficulties in the generalization and application of the role. | Physical Sciences in Ancient Greece
whewell | Hevelius, who was a most diligent observer of these objects, had, without reference to gravitation, satisfied himself that they moved in parabolas. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | To determine the elements of the parabola from observations, even Newton called 'problema longe difficillimum.' | Greek Astronomy
whewell | Newton determined the orbit of the comet of 1680 by certain graphical methods. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | His methods supposed the orbit to be a parabola, and satisfactorily represented the motion in the visible part of the comet's path. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | Halley has the glory of having first detected a periodical comet, in the case of that which has since borne his name. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | In 1705, Halley explained how the parabolic orbit of a planet may be determined from three observations; and, joining example to precept, himself calculated the positions and orbits of twenty-four comets. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | He found, as the reward of this industry, that the comets of 1607 and of 1531 had the same orbit as that of 1682. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | And here the intervals are also nearly the same, namely, about seventy-five years. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | In looking back into the history of such appearances, he found comets recorded in 1456, in 1380, and in 1305; the intervals are still the same, seventy-five or seventy-six years. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | It was impossible now to doubt that they were the periods of a revolving body; that the comet was a planet; its orbit a long ellipse, not a parabola. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | But if this were so, the Comet must reappear in 1758 or 1759. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | Halley predicted that it would do so; and the fulfilment of this prediction was naturally looked forwards to, as an additional stamp of the truths of the theory of gravitation. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | The planets must disturb its motion as they disturb each other. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | The effect of perturbations upon a comet defeats all known methods of approximation, and requires immense labor. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | Clairaut, says Bailly, undertook this: with courage enough to dare the adventure, he had talent enough to obtain a memorable victory; | Greek Astronomy
whewell | He predicted that the comet would reach its perihelion April 13, 1759, but claimed the license of a month for the inevitable inaccuracy of a calculation which, in addition to all other sources of error, was made in haste, that it might appear as a prediction. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | The comet justified his calculations and his caution together; for it arrived at its perihelion on the 13th of March. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | Two other Comets, of much shorter period, have been detected of late years; Encke's, which revolves round the sun in three years and one-third, and Biela's which describes an ellipse, not extremely eccentric, in six years and three-quarters. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | These bodies, apparently thin and vaporous masses, like other comets, have, since their orbits were calculated, punctually conformed to the law of gravitation. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | The return of Halley's Comet again in 1835, and the extreme exactitude with which it conformed to its predicted course, is a testimony of truth, which must appear striking even to the most incurious respecting such matters. | Greek Astronomy
whewell | its transverse vibrations may be conceived to be identical with the lateral swingings of such a festoon. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Observing that the string C, in the middle of a harpsichord, hangs in such a festoon to the amount of 1/323rd of an inch, he calculates, by the laws of pendulums, the time of oscillation, and finds it 1/122nd of a second. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Thus this C, his fixed note, makes one hundred and twenty-two vibrations in a second. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | It is curious that this process, seemingly so arbitrary, is capable of being justified on mechanical principles; though we can hardly give the author credit for the views which this justification implies. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | It is, therefore, easy to understand that it agreed with other experiments, in the laws which it gave for the dependence of the tone on the length and tension. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | The problem of satisfactorily explaining this dependence, on mechanical principles, naturally pressed upon the attention of mathematicians when the law of the phenomena was thus completely determined by Mersenne and Sauveur. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | It was desirable to show that both the circumstances and the measure of the phenomena were such as known mechanical causes and laws would explain. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | But this problem, as might be expected, was not attacked till mechanical principles, and the modes of applying them, had become tolerably familiar. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | As the vibrations of a string are produced by its tension, it appeared to be necessary, in the first place, to determine the law of the tension which is called into action by the motion of the string. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | for it is manifest that, when the string is drawn aside from the straight line into which it is stretched, there arises an additional tension, which aids in drawing it back to the straight line as soon as it is let go. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Hooke (On Spring, 1678) determined the law of this additional tension, which he expressed in his noted formula, 'Ut tensio sic vis,' the Force is as the Tension; or rather, to express his meaning more clearly, the Force of tension is as the Extension, or, in a string, as the increase of length. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | But, in reality, this principle, which is important in many acoustical problems, is, in the one now before us, unimportant; the force which urges the string towards the straight line, depends, with such small extensions as we have now to consider, not on the extension, but on the curvature. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | and the power of treating the mathematical difficulty of curvature, and its mechanical consequences, was what was requisite for the solution of this problem. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | The problem, in its proper aspect, was first attacked and mastered by Brook Taylor, an English mathematician of the school of Newton, by whom the solution was published in 1715, in his Methodus Incrementorum. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Taylor's solution was indeed imperfect, for it only pointed out a form and a mode of vibration, with which the string might move consistently with the laws of mechanics; not the mode in which it must move, supposing its form to be any whatever. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | It showed that the curve might be of the nature of that which is called the companion to the cycloid; and, on the supposition of the curve of the string being of this form, the calculation confirmed the previously established laws by which the tone, or the time of vibration, had been discovered to depend on the length, tension, and bulk of the string. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | The mathematical incompleteness of Taylor's reasoning must not prevent us from looking upon his solution of the problem as the most important step in the progress of this part of the subject. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | for the difficulty of applying mechanical principles to the question being once overcome, the extension and correction of the application was sure to be undertaken by succeeding mathematicians; and, accordingly, this soon happened. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | We may add, moreover, that the subsequent and more general solutions require to be considered with reference to Taylor's, in order to apprehend distinctly their import. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | and further, that it was almost evident to a mathematician, even before the general solution had appeared, that the dependence of the time of vibration on the length and tension, would be the same in the general case as in the Taylorian curve; so that, for the ends of physical philosophy, the solution was not very incomplete. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | John Bernoulli, a few years afterwards, solved the problem of vibrating chords on nearly the same principles and suppositions as Taylor; but a little later (in 1747), the next generation of great mathematicians, D'Alembert, Euler, and Daniel Bernoulli, applied the increased powers of analysis to give generality to the mode of treating this question. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | and especially the calculus of partial differentials, invented for this purpose. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | But at this epoch, the discussion, so far as it bore on physics, belonged rather to the history of another problem, which comes under our notice hereafter, that of the composition of vibrations. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | we shall, therefore, defer the further history of the problem of vibrating strings, till we have to consider it in connexion with new experimental facts. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | We have seen that the ancient philosophers, for the most part, held that sound was transmitted, as well as produced, by some motion of the air, without defining what kind of motion this was. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | that some writers, however, applied to it a very happy similitude, the expansive motion of the circular waves produced by throwing a stone into still water. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | but that notwithstanding, some rejected this mode of conception, as, for instance, Bacon, who ascribed the transmission of sound to certain 'spiritual species.' | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Though it was an obvious thought to ascribe the motion of sound to some motion of air; to conceive what kind of motion could and did produce this effect, must have been a matter of grave perplexity at the time of which we are speaking; and is far from easy to most persons even now. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | We may judge of the difficulty of forming this conception, when we recollect that John Bernoulli the younger declared, that he could not understand Newton's proposition on this subject. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | The difficulty consists in this; that the movement of the parts of air, in which sound consists, travels along, but that the parts of air themselves do not so travel. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Accordingly Otto Guericke, the inventor of the air-pump, asks, 'How can sound be conveyed by the motion of the air? when we find that it is better conveyed through air that is still, than when there is a wind.' | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | We may observe, however, that he was partly misled by finding, as he thought, that a bell could be heard in the vacuum of his air-pump; a result which arose, probably, from some imperfection in his apparatus. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Attempts were made to determine, by experiment, the circumstances of the motion of sound; and especially its velocity. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Gassendi was one of the first who did this. He employed fire-arms for the purpose, and thus found the velocity to be 1473 Paris feet in a second. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Roberval found a velocity so small (560 feet) that it threw uncertainty upon the rest, and affected Newton's reasonings subsequently. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Cassini, Huyghens, Picard, Römer, found a velocity of 1172 Paris feet, which is more accurate than the former. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Gassendi had been surprised to find that the velocity with which sounds travel, is the same whether they are loud or gentle. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | The explanation of this constant velocity of sound, and of its amount, was one of the problems of which a solution was given in the Great Charter of modern science, Newton's Principia (1687). | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | There, for the first time, were explained the real nature of the motions and mutual action of the parts of the air through which sound is transmitted. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | It was shown that a body vibrating in an elastic medium, will propagate pulses through the medium; that is, the parts of the medium will move forwards and backwards, and this motion will affect successively those parts which are at a greater and greater distance from the origin of motion. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | The parts, in going forwards, produce condensation; in returning to their first places, they allow extension; and the play of the elasticities developed by these expansions and contractions, supplies the forces which continue to propagate the motion. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | The idea of such a motion as this, is, as we have said, far from easy to apprehend distinctly: but a distinct apprehension of it is a step essential to the physical part of the sciences now under notice. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | for it is by means of such pulses, or undulations, that not only sound, but light, and probably heat, are propagated. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | We constantly meet with evidence of the difficulty which men have in conceiving this undulatory motion, and in separating it from a local motion of the medium as a mass. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | For instance, it is not easy at first to conceive the waters of a great river flowing constantly down towards the sea, while waves are rolling up the very same part of the stream; and while the great elevation, which makes the tide, is travelling from the sea perhaps with a velocity of fifty miles an hour. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | The motion of such a wave, or elevation, is distinct from any stream, and is of the nature of undulations in general. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | The parts of the fluid stir for a short time and for a small distance, so as to accumulate themselves on a neighboring part, and then retire to their former place; and this movement affects the parts in the order of their places. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Perhaps if the reader looks at a field of standing corn when gusts of wind are sweeping over it in visible waves, he will have his conception of this matter aided; for he will see that here, where each ear of grain is anchored by its stalk, there can be no permanent local motion of the substance, but only a successive stooping and rising of the separate straws, producing hollows and waves, closer and laxer strips of the crowded ears. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Newton had, moreover, to consider the mechanical consequences which such condensations and rarefactions of the elastic medium, air, would produce in the parts of the fluid itself. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Employing known laws of the elasticity of air, he showed, in a very remarkable proposition, the law according to which the particles of air might vibrate. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | We may observe, that in this solution, as in that of the vibrating string already mentioned, a rule was exhibited according to which the particles might oscillate, but not the law to which they must conform. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | It was proved that, by taking the motion of each particle to be perfectly similar to that of a pendulum, the forces, developed by contraction and expansion, were precisely such as the motion required; but it was not shown that no other type of oscillation would give rise to the same accordance of force and motion. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Newton's reasoning also gave a determination of the speed of propagation of the pulses: it appeared that sound ought to travel with the velocity which a body would acquire by falling freely through half the height of a homogeneous atmosphere. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | the height of a homogeneous atmosphere being the height which the air must have, in order to produce, at the earth's surface, the actual atmospheric pressure, supposing no diminution of density to take place in ascending. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | This height is about 29,000 feet; and hence it followed that the velocity was 968 feet. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | This velocity is really considerably less than that of sound; but at the time of which we speak, no accurate measure had been established; and Newton persuaded himself, by experiments made in the cloister of Trinity College, his residence, that his calculation was not far from the fact. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | When, afterwards, more exact experiments showed the velocity to be 1142 English feet, Newton attempted to explain the difference by various considerations, none of which were adequate to the purpose;--as, the dimensions of the solid particles of which the fluid air consists;--or the vapors which are mixed with it. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Newton's calculation of the motion of sound, though logically incomplete, was the great step in the solution of the problem; for mathematicians could not but presume that his result was not restricted to the hypothesis on which he had obtained it; and the extension of the solution required only mere ordinary talents. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | The logical defect of his solution was assailed, as might have been expected. Cranmer (professor at Geneva), in 1741, conceived that he was destroying the conclusiveness of Newton's reasoning, by showing that it applied equally to other modes of oscillation. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | This, indeed, contradicted the enunciation of the 48th Prop. of the Second Book of the Principia; but it confirmed and extended all the general results of the demonstration; for it left even the velocity of sound unaltered, and thus showed that the velocity did not depend mechanically on the type of the oscillation. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | But the satisfactory establishment of this physical generalization was to be supplied from the vast generalizations of analysis, which mathematicians were now becoming able to deal with. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Accordingly this task was performed by the great master of analytical generalization, Lagrange, in 1759, when, at the age of twenty-three, he and two friends published the first volume of the Turin Memoirs. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Euler, as his manner was, at once perceived the merit of the new solution, and pursued the subject on the views thus suggested. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Various analytical improvements and extensions were introduced into the solution by the two great mathematicians; but none of these at all altered the formula by which the velocity of sound was expressed; and the discrepancy between calculation and observation, about one-sixth of the whole, which had perplexed Newton, remained still unaccounted for. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | The merit of satisfactorily explaining this discrepancy belongs to Laplace. He was the first to remark that the common law of the changes of elasticity in the air, as dependent on its compression, cannot be applied to those rapid vibrations in which sound consists, since the sudden compression produces a degree of heat which additionally increases the elasticity. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | The ratio of this increase depended on the experiments by which the relation of heat and air is established. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | Laplace, in 1816, published the theorem on which the correction depends. On applying it, the calculated velocity of sound agreed very closely with the best antecedent experiments, and was confirmed by more exact ones instituted for that purpose. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | This step completes the solution of the problem of the propagation of sound, as a mathematical induction, obtained from, and verified by, facts. | Physical Science in the Middle Ages
whewell | We conclude from these various remarks, and principally from the mathematical examination of the question, that this is so. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | I am not aware that the mathematical calculation which bears peculiarly upon this point has anywhere been published. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | Svanberg has been led to the opinion of the same temperature in these spaces which Fourier had adopted (50 centigrade below zero), by an entirely different course of reasoning, founded on the relation of the atmosphere to heat. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | Thermotics is a science, which, like Mechanics, is to be established by experiments on masses capable of manipulation, but which, like that, has for its most important office the solution of geological and cosmological problems. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | This correction was the result of the researches of MM. Dulong and Petit in 1817, and the researches by which they were led to the true law, are an admirable example both of laborious experiment and sagacious induction. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | They experimented through a very great range of temperature (as high as two hundred and forty degrees centigrade), which was necessary because the inaccuracy of Newton's law becomes considerable only at high temperatures. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | They removed the effect of the surrounding medium, by making their experiments in a vacuum. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | They selected with great judgment the conditions of their experiments and comparisons, making one quantity vary while the others remained constant. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | the quickness of cooling for a constant excess of temperature, increases in geometrical progression, when the temperature of the surrounding space increases in arithmetical progression | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | the quickness of cooling, so far as it depends on the excess of temperature of the hot body, increases as the terms of a geometrical progression diminished by a constant number, when the temperature of the hot body increases in arithmetical progression | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | These two laws, with the coefficients requisite for their application to particular substances, fully determine the conditions of cooling in a vacuum. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | Starting from this determination, MM. Dulong and Petit proceeded to ascertain the effect of the medium, in which the hot body is placed, upon its rate of cooling; for this effect became a residual phenomenon, when the cooling in the vacuum was taken away. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | the rapidity of cooling due to any gaseous medium in which the body is placed, is the same, so long as the excess of the body's temperature is the same, although the temperature itself vary | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | the cooling power of a gas varies with the elasticity, according to a determined law; and other similar rules | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | In reference to the process of their induction, it is worthy of notice, that they founded their reasonings upon Prevost's law of exchanges; and that, in this way, the second of their laws above stated, respecting the quickness of cooling, was a mathematical consequence of the first. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | their temperatures are measured by means of the air-thermometer, and that if they were estimated on another scale, the remarkable simplicity and symmetry of their results would disappear | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | This is a strong argument for believing such a measure of temperature to have a natural prerogative of simplicity. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | this correction of Newton's law will materially affect the mathematical calculations on the subject, which were made to depend on that law both by Fourier, Laplace, and Poisson | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | Probably, however, the general features of the results will be the same as on the old supposition. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | M. Libri, an Italian mathematician, has undertaken one of the problems of this kind, that of the armil, with Dulong and Petit's law for his basis, in a Memoir read to the Institute of France in 1825, and since published at Florence. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | the powers of bodies to emit and to absorb heat, as far as depends upon their surface, appear to be in the same proportion | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | If we blacken the surface of a canister of hot water, it radiates heat more copiously; and in the same measure, it is more readily heated by radiation. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | as the radiative power increases, the power of reflection diminishes, and the contrary | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | A bright metal vessel reflects much heat; on this very account it does not emit much; and hence a hot fluid which such a vessel contains, remains hot longer than it does in an unpolished case. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | The heat is emitted from every point of the surface of a hot body in all directions; but by no means in all directions with equal intensity. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | The intensity of the heating ray is as the sine of the angle which it makes with the surface. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | The last law is entirely, the two former in a great measure, due to the researches of Leslie, whose Experimental Inquiry into the Nature and Propagation of Heat, published in 1804, contains a great number of curious and striking results and speculations. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | Fourier's explanation of this class of phenomena must be considered as happy and successful; for he has shown that the supposition to which we are led by the most simple and general of the facts, will explain, moreover, the less obvious laws. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | It is an obvious and general fact, that bodies which are included in the space tend to acquire the same temperature. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | And this identity of temperature of neighboring bodies requires an hypothesis, which, it is found, also accounts for Leslie's law of the sine, in radiation. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | This hypothesis is, that the radiation takes place, not from the surface alone of the hot body, but from all particles situated within a certain small depth of the surface. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | a ray emitted obliquely from an internal particle, will be less intense than one sent forth perpendicular to the surface, because the former will be intercepted in a greater degree, having a greater length of path within the body | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | Fourier shows, that whatever be the law of this intercepting power, the result will be, that the radiative intensity is as the sine of the angle made by the ray with the surface. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | But this law is, as I have said, likewise necessary, in order that neighboring bodies may tend to assume the same temperature: for instance, in order that a small particle placed within a spherical shell, should finally assume the temperature of the shell. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | If the law of the sines did not obtain, the final temperature of such a particle would depend upon its place in the inclosure; and within a shell of ice we should have, at certain points, the temperature of boiling water and of melting iron. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | This proposition may at first appear strange and unlikely; but it may be shown to be a necessary consequence of the assumed principle, by very simple reasoning, which I shall give in a general form in a Note. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | The equilibrium and identity of temperature between an including shell and an included body, cannot obtain upon the whole, except it obtain between each pair of parts of the two surfaces of the body and of the shell; that is, any part of the one surface, in its exchanges with any part of the other surface, must give and receive the same quantity of heat. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | Now the quantity exchanged, so far as it depends on the receiving surface, will, by geometry, be proportional to the sine of the obliquity of that surface: and as, in the exchanges, each may be considered as receiving, the quantity transferred must be proportional to the sines of the two obliquities; that is, to that of the giving as well as of the receiving surface. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | Nor is this conclusion disturbed by the consideration, that all the rays of heat which fall upon a surface are not absorbed, some being reflected according to the nature of the surface. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | For, by the other above-mentioned laws of phenomena, we know that, in the same measure in which the surface loses the power of admitting, it loses the power of emitting, heat; and the superficial parts gain, by absorbing their own radiation, as much as they lose by not absorbing the incident heat; so that the result of the preceding reasoning remains unaltered. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | This reasoning is capable of being presented in a manner quite satisfactory, by the use of mathematical symbols, and proves that Leslie's law of the sines is rigorously and mathematically true on Fourier's hypothesis. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | And thus Fourier's theory of molecular extra-radiation acquires great consistency. | Formal Astronomy After the Middle Ages
whewell | Those who first attempted to establish regular formulæ for the constitution of salts, minerals, and other compounds, assumed, as the basis of this process, that the elements in different specimens had the same proportion. | History of Mechanics
whewell | Wenzel, in 1777, published his Lehre von der Verwandschaft der Körper; or, Doctrine of the Affinities of Bodies; in which he gave many good and accurate analyses. | History of Mechanics
whewell | His work, it is said, never grew into general notice. | History of Mechanics
whewell | Berthollet, as we have already stated, maintained that chemical compounds were not definite; but this controversy took place at a later period. | History of Mechanics
whewell | It ended in the establishment of the doctrine, that there is, for each combination, only one proportion of the elements, or at most only two or three. | History of Mechanics
whewell | Not only did Wenzel, by his very attempt, presume the first law of chemical composition, the definiteness of the proportions, but he was also led, by his results, to the second rule, that they are reciprocal. | History of Mechanics
whewell | For he found that when two neutral salts decompose each other, the resulting salts are also neutral. | History of Mechanics
whewell | The neutral character of the salts shows that they are definite compounds; and when the two elements of the one salt, P and s, are presented to those of the other, B and n, if P be in such quantity as to combine definitely with n, B will also combine definitely with s. | History of Mechanics
whewell | Views similar to those of Wenzel were also published by Jeremiah Benjamin Richter in 1792, in his Anfangsgründe der Stöchyometrie, oder Messkunst Chymischer Elemente, (Principles of the Measure of Chemical Elements) in which he took the law, just stated, of reciprocal proportions, as the basis of his researches. | History of Mechanics
whewell | It is clear that, by these steps, the two first of our three rules may be considered as fully developed. | History of Mechanics
whewell | The change of general views which was at this time going on, probably prevented chemists from feeling so much interest as they might have done otherwise, in these details; the French and English chemists, in particular, were fully employed with their own researches and controversies. | History of Mechanics
whewell | Thus the rules which had already been published by Wenzel and Richter had attracted so little notice, that we can hardly consider Mr. Dalton as having been anticipated by those writers, when, in 1803, he began to communicate his views on the chemical constitution of bodies. | History of Mechanics
whewell | He conceived bodies as composed of atoms of their constituent elements, grouped, either one and one, or one and two, or one and three, and so on. | History of Mechanics
whewell | Thus, if C represent an atom of carbon and O one of oxygen, O C will be an atom of carbonic oxide, and O C O an atom of carbonic acid; and hence it follows, that while both these bodies have a definite quantity of oxygen to a given quantity of carbon, in the latter substance this quantity is double of what it is in the former. | History of Mechanics
whewell | The consideration of bodies as consisting of compound atoms, each of these being composed of elementary atoms, naturally led to this law of multiple proportions. | History of Mechanics
whewell | In this mode of viewing bodies, Mr. Dalton had been preceded (unknown to himself) by Mr. Higgins, who, in 1789, published his Comparative View of the Phlogistic and Antiphlogistic Theories. | History of Mechanics
whewell | These observations of Higgins were, however, made casually, and not followed out, and cannot affect Dalton's claim to original merit. | History of Mechanics
whewell | Mr. Dalton's generalization was first suggested during his examination of olefiant gas and carburetted hydrogen gas; and was asserted generally, on the strength of a few facts, being, as it were, irresistibly recommended by the clearness and simplicity which the notion possessed. | History of Mechanics
whewell | Mr. Dalton himself represented the compound atoms of bodies by symbols, which professed to exhibit the arrangement of the elementary atoms in space as well as their numerical proportion; and he attached great importance to this part of his scheme. | History of Mechanics
whewell | It is clear, however, that this part of his doctrine is not essential to that numerical comparison of the law with facts, on which its establishment rests. | History of Mechanics
whewell | To obtain some simple and consistent view of the progress of physiological science, is in the highest degree important to the completion of our views of the progress of physical science. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | For the physiological or organical sciences form a class to which the classes already treated of, the mechanical, chemical, and classificatory sciences, are subordinate and auxiliary. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | Another circumstance which makes physiology an important part of our survey of human knowledge is, that we have here a science which is concerned, indeed, about material combinations, but in which we are led almost beyond the borders of the material world, into the region of sensation and perception, thought and will. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | Such a contemplation may offer some suggestions which may prepare us for the transition from physical to metaphysical speculations. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | In the survey which we must, for such purposes, take of the progress of physiology, it is by no means necessary that we should exhaust the subject, and attempt to give the history of every branch of the knowledge of the phenomena and laws of living creatures. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | It will be sufficient, if we follow a few of the lines of such researches, which may be considered as examples of the whole. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | We see that life is accompanied and sustained by many processes, which at first offer themselves to our notice as separate functions, however they may afterwards be found to be connected and identified; such are feeling, digestion, respiration, the action of the heart and pulse, generation, perception, voluntary motion. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | The analysis of any one of these functions may be pursued separately. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | And since in this, as in all genuine sciences, our knowledge becomes real and scientific, only in so far as it is verified in particular facts, and thus established in general propositions, such an original separation of the subjects of research is requisite to a true representation of the growth of real knowledge. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | The loose hypotheses and systems, concerning the connexion of different vital faculties and the general nature of living things, which have often been promulgated, must be excluded from this part of our plan. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | We do not deny all value and merit to such speculations; but they cannot be admitted in the earlier stages of the history of physiology, treated of as an inductive science. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | If the doctrine so propounded have a solid and permanent truth, they will again come before us when we have travelled through the range of more limited truths, and are prepared to ascend with security and certainty into the higher region of general physiological principles. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | If they cannot be arrived at by such a road, they are then, however plausible and pleasing, no portion of that real and progressive science with which alone our history is concerned. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | We proceed, therefore, to trace the establishment of some of the more limited but certain doctrines of physiology. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | IN the earliest conceptions which men entertained of their power of moving their own members, they probably had no thought of any mechanism or organization by which this was effected. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | The foot and the hand, no less than the head, were seen to be endowed with life; and this pervading life seemed sufficiently to explain the power of motion in each part of the frame, without its being held necessary to seek out a special seat of the will, or instruments by which its impulses were made effective. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | But the slightest inspection of dissected animals showed that their limbs were formed of a curious and complex collection of cordage, and communications of various kinds, running along and connecting the bones of the skeleton. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | These cords and communications we now distinguish as muscles, nerves, veins, arteries, &c.; and among these, we assign to the muscles the office of moving the parts to which they are attached, as cords move the parts of a machine. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | Though this action of the muscles on the bones may now appear very obvious, it was, probably, not at first discerned. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | It is observed that Homer, who describes the wounds which are inflicted in his battles with so much apparent anatomical precision, nowhere employs the word muscle. | Physical Astronomy
whewell | WITHIN certain limits, however, as we have said, external circumstances produce changes in the forms of organized beings. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | The causes of change, and the laws and limits of their effects, as they obtain in the existing state of the organic creation, are in the highest degree interesting. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | And, as has been already intimated, the knowledge thus obtained, has been applied with a view to explain the origin of the existing population of the world, and the succession of its past conditions. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | But those who have attempted such an explanation, have found it necessary to assume certain additional laws, in order to enable themselves to deduce, from the tenet of the transmutability of the species of organized beings, such a state of things as we see about us. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | And here, again, we are brought to questions of which we must seek the answers from the most profound physiologists. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | Now referring, as before, to those which appear to be the best authorities, it is found that these additional positive laws are still more inadmissible than the primary assumption of indefinite capacity of change. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | For example, in order to account, on this hypothesis, for the seeming adaptation of the endowments of animals to their wants, it is held that the endowments are the result of the wants. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | In this way, it is maintained that the most striking attributes of animals, those which apparently imply most clearly the providing skill of their Creator, have been brought forth by the long-repeated efforts of the creatures to attain the object of their desire. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | thus animals with the highest endowments have been gradually developed from ancestral forms of the most limited organization. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | thus fish, bird, and beast, have grown from small gelatinous bodies, 'petits corps gelatineux,' possessing some obscure principle of life, and the capacity of development. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | and thus man himself with all his intellectual and moral, as well as physical privileges, has been derived from some creature of the ape or baboon tribe, urged by a constant tendency to improve, or at least to alter his condition. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | As we have said, in order to arrive even hypothetically at this result, it is necessary to assume besides a mere capacity for change, other positive and active principles, some of which we may notice. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | Thus, we must have as the direct productions of nature on this hypothesis, certain monads or rough draughts, the primary rudiments of plants and animals. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | We must have, in these, a constant tendency to progressive improvement, to the attainment of higher powers and faculties than they possess. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | which tendency is again perpetually modified and controlled by the force of external circumstances. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | And in order to account for the simultaneous existence of animals in every stage of this imaginary progress, we must suppose that nature is compelled to be constantly producing those elementary beings, from which all animals are successively developed. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | I need not stay to point out how extremely arbitrary every part of this scheme is; and how complex its machinery would be, even if it did account for the facts. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | It may be sufficient to observe, as others have done, that the capacity of change, and of being influenced by external circumstances, such as we really find it in nature, and therefore such as in science we must represent it, is a tendency, not to improve, but to deteriorate. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | When species are modified by external causes, they usually degenerate, and do not advance. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | And there is no instance of a species acquiring an entirely new sense, faculty, or organ, in addition to, or in the place of, what it had before. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | Not only, then, is the doctrine of the transmutation of species in itself disproved by the best physiological reasonings, but the additional assumptions which are requisite, to enable its advocates to apply it to the explanation of the geological and other phenomena of the earth, are altogether gratuitous and fantastical. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | Such is the judgment to which we are led by the examination of the discussions which have taken place on this subject. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | Yet in certain speculations, occasioned by the discovery of the Sivatherium, a new fossil animal from the Sub-Himalaya mountains of India, M. Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire speaks of the belief in the immutability of species as a conviction which is fading away from men's minds. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | He speaks too of the termination of the age of Cuvier, 'la clôture du siècle de Cuvier,' and of the commencement of a better zoological philosophy. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | But though he expresses himself with great animation, I do not perceive that he adduces, in support of his peculiar opinions, any arguments in addition to those which he urged during the lifetime of Cuvier. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | And the reader may recollect that the consideration of that controversy led us to very different anticipations from his, respecting the probable future progress of physiology. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | The discovery of the Sivatherium supplies no particle of proof to the hypothesis, that the existing species of animals are descended from extinct creatures which are specifically distinct. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | and we cannot act more wisely than in listening to the advice of that eminent naturalist, M. de Blainville. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy
whewell | Against this hypothesis, which, up to the present time, I regard as purely gratuitous, and likely to turn geologists out of the sound and excellent road in which they now are, I willingly raise my voice, with the most absolute conviction of being in the right. | Instruments and Aids of Astronomy