hobbes | I dedicate to you this edition of the Works of Hobbes; first, because I know you will be well pleased to see a complete collection of all the writings of an Author for whom you have so high an admiration. | Introduction to Hobbes' Works
hobbes | Secondly, because I am indebted to you for my first acquaintance with the speculations of one of the greatest and most original thinkers in the English language, whose works, I have often heard you regret, were so scarce, and so much less read and studied than they deserved to be. | Introduction to Hobbes' Works
hobbes | It now, therefore, gives me great satisfaction to be able to gratify a wish, you have frequently expressed, that some person, who had time and due reverence for that illustrious man, would undertake to edite his works, and bring his views again before his countrymen, who have so long and so unjustly neglected him. | Introduction to Hobbes' Works
hobbes | Lastly, the science of man's body, the most profitable part of natural science, was first discovered with admirable sagacity by our countryman Doctor Harvey, principal Physician to King James and King Charles, in his books of the Motion of the Blood, and of the Generation of Living Creatures; who is the only man I know, that conquering envy, hath established a new doctrine in his life-time. | Introduction to Hobbes' Works
hobbes | But since these, astronomy and natural philosophy in general have, for so little time, been extraordinarily advanced by Joannes Keplerus, Petrus Gassendus, and Marinus Mersennus; and the science of human bodies in special by the wit and industry of physicians, the only true natural philosophers, especially of our most learned men of the College of Physicians in London. | Introduction to Hobbes' Works
hobbes | It is like that Empusa in the Athenian comic poet, which was taken in Athens for a ghost that changed shapes, having one brazen leg, but the other was the leg of an ass, and was sent, as was believed, by Hecate, as a sign of some approaching evil fortune. | Introduction to Hobbes' Works
hobbes | But if the same notes be made common to many, and so one man's inventions be taught to others, sciences will thereby be increased to the general good of mankind. | Introduction to Hobbes' Works
hobbes | A name is not taken in philosophy, as in grammar, for one single word, but for any number of words put together to signify one thing. | Introduction to Hobbes' Works
hobbes | There is also this difference betwixt concrete and abstract names, that those were invented before propositions, but these after; for these could have no being till there were propositions, from whose copula they proceed. | Introduction to Hobbes' Works
hobbes | For speech has something in it like to a spider's web, (as it was said of old of Solon's laws) for by contexture of words tender and delicate wits are ensnared and stopped; but strong wits break easily through them. | Introduction to Hobbes' Works
hobbes | art of reasoning is not so well learned by precepts as by practice, and by the reading of those books in which the conclusions are all made by severe demonstration. | Dedication to George Grote
hobbes | Philosophy is the knowledge we acquire, by true ratiocination, of appearances, or apparent effects, from the knowledge we have of some possible production or generation of the same; and of such production, as has been or may be, from the knowledge we have of the effects. | Dedication to George Grote
hobbes | METHOD, therefore, in the study of philosophy, is the shortest way of finding out effects by their known causes, or of causes by their known effects. | Dedication to George Grote
hobbes | We are then said to know any effect, when we know that there be causes of the same, and in what subject those causes are, and in what subject they produce that effect, and in what manner they work the same. | Dedication to George Grote
hobbes | It is easier known concerning singular than universal things, that they are; and contrarily it is easier known concerning universal than singular things, why they are, or what are their causes. | Dedication to George Grote
hobbes | To those that seek the cause of some certain and propounded appearance or effect, it happens, sometimes, that they know not whether the thing, whose cause is sought after, be matter or body, or some accident of a body. | Dedication to George Grote
hobbes | For in this place it cannot be said that space is the extension of bodies; for, that which is extended is body, and that cannot be body, which is an accident; wherefore, neither can space be extended, neither can space be a body, nor an accident. | Dedication to George Grote
hobbes | Time is the phantasm of the before and after in motion; which agrees with this definition of Aristotle, time is the number of motion according to former and latter. | Dedication to George Grote
hobbes | The end of science is the demonstration of the causes and generations of things; which if they be not in the definitions, they cannot be found in the conclusion of the first syllogism, that is made from those definitions; and if they be not in the first conclusion, they will not be found in any further conclusion deduced from that; and, therefore, by proceeding in this manner, we shall never come to science. | Dedication to George Grote
hobbes | The properties of a definition are: First, that it takes away equivocation, as also all that multitude of distinctions, which are used by such as think they may learn philosophy by disputation. | Dedication to George Grote
hobbes | Definitions of things, which may be understood to have some cause, must consist of such names as express the cause or manner of their generation. | Dedication to George Grote
hobbes | Any two definitions, that may be compounded into a syllogism, produce a conclusion; which, because it is derived from principles, that is, from definitions, is said to be demonstrated; and the derivation or composition itself is called a demonstration. | Dedication to George Grote
hobbes | A point, a line, superficies, and solid, what they are. | Translator's Note
hobbes | Bodies, how many soever they be, that can fill every one the place of every one, are said to be equal every one to every other. | Translator's Note
hobbes | One and the same body has always one and the same magnitude. | Translator's Note
hobbes | Whatsoever is at rest, will always be at rest, unless there be some other body besides it, which, by endeavouring to get into its place by motion, suffers it no longer to remain at rest. | Translator's Note
hobbes | Whatsoever is moved, will always be moved, except there be some other body besides it, which causeth it to rest. | Translator's Note
hobbes | When we say a living creature, a tree, or any other specified body is generated or destroyed, it is not to be so understood as if there were made a body of that which is not-body, or not a body of a body, but of a living creature not a living creature, of a tree not a tree, &c. | Translator's Note
hobbes | An accident cannot depart from its subject | Translator's Note
hobbes | Essence, form, and matter, what they are. | Translator's Note
hobbes | Action and passion, what they are. | Translator's Note
hobbes | Action and passion, mediate, and immediate. | Translator's Note
hobbes | Cause without which no effect follows, or cause necessary by supposition. | Translator's Note
hobbes | Cause efficient, and material. | Translator's Note
hobbes | An entire cause is always sufficient to produce its effect. | Translator's Note
hobbes | At the same instant that the cause is entire, the effect is produced. | Translator's Note
hobbes | Every effect has a necessary cause. | Translator's Note
hobbes | The generation of effects is continual. What is the beginning in causation. | Translator's Note
hobbes | No cause of motion but in a body contiguous and moved. | Translator's Note
hobbes | the answer may be made by comparing it two ways; first, by saying it is greater or less than another magnitude, by so much; as seven is less than ten, by three unities; and this is called arithmetical proportion. | Author's Epistle Dedicatory
hobbes | this proportion be not always explicable by number, yet it is a determinate proportion, and of a different kind from the former, and called geometrical proportion, and most commonly proportion simply. | Author's Epistle Dedicatory
hobbes | Proportion, whether it be arithmetical or geometrical, cannot be exposed but in two magnitudes, (of which the former is commonly called the antecedent, and the latter the consequent of the proportion) | Author's Epistle Dedicatory
hobbes | if two proportions be to be compared, there must be four magnitudes exposed, namely, two antecedents and two consequents | Author's Epistle Dedicatory
hobbes | of two proportions, whether they be arithmetical or geometrical, when the magnitudes compared in both (which Euclid, in the fifth definition of his sixth book, calls the quantities of proportions,) are equal, then one of the proportions cannot be either greater or less than the other | Author's Epistle Dedicatory
hobbes | of two proportions of inequality, whether they be proportions of excess or of defect, one of them may be either greater or less than the other, or they may both be equal | Author's Epistle Dedicatory
hobbes | the proportions of excess and defect are quantity, being capable of more and less; but the proportion of equality is not quantity, because not capable neither of more, nor of less. | Author's Epistle Dedicatory
hobbes | Two equal proportions are commonly called the same proportion; and, it is said, that the proportion of the first antecedent to the first consequent is the same with that of the second antecedent to the second consequent. | Author's Epistle Dedicatory
hobbes | when four magnitudes are thus to one another in geometrical proportion, they are called proportionals; and by some, more briefly, analogism. | Author's Epistle Dedicatory
hobbes | of four unequal magnitudes, any two, together taken, be equal to the other two together taken, then the greatest and the least of them will be in the same combination. | Author's Epistle Dedicatory
hobbes | Seeing therefore both the motions are made in the same time, when A B is in C D, the body also will be in C D; and in like manner, when A C is in B D, the body will be in B D. | Author's Epistle to the Reader
hobbes | If a body be carried on with uniform motion by two movents together, which meet in an angle, the line by which it passes will be a strait line, subtending the complement of that angle to 2 right angles. | Author's Epistle to the Reader
hobbes | If a body be carried by two movents together, which move with strait and uniform motion, and concur in any given angle, the line by which that body passes will be a strait line. | Author's Epistle to the Reader
hobbes | Let the movent A B (in fig. 4) have strait and uniform motion, and be moved till it come into the place C D; and let another movent A C, having likewise strait and uniform motion, and making with the movent A B any given angle C A B, be understood to be moved in the same time to D B; and let the body be placed in the point of their concourse, A. | Author's Epistle to the Reader
hobbes | For let the parallelogram A B D C be completed, and its diagonal A D be drawn; and in the strait line A B let any point E be taken; and from it let E F be drawn parallel to the strait lines A C and B D, cutting A D in G; and through the point G let H I be drawn parallel to the strait lines A B and C D; and lastly, let the measure of the time be A C. | Author's Epistle to the Reader
hobbes | And because the length Z is to the length X as A F is to A G, and the impetus A E to the impetus A C as A G to D C, therefore the proportion of A B to A D will be compounded of the proportions of the length Z to the length X, and of the impetus A E to the impetus A C; which was to be demonstrated. | Author's Epistle to the Reader
hobbes | If a body be carried by two movents together, which meet in any given angle, and are moved, the one uniformly, the other with motion uniformly accelerated from rest, that is, that the proportion of their impetus be as that of their times, that is, that the proportion of their lengths be duplicate to that of the lines of their times, till the line of greatest impetus acquired by acceleration be equal to that of the line of time of the uniform motion; the line in which the body is carried will be the crooked line of a semiparabola, whose base is the impetus last acquired, and vertex the point of rest. | Author's Epistle to the Reader
hobbes | Let the straight line A B (in fig. 5) be understood to be moved with uniform motion to C D; and let another movent in the strait line A C be supposed to be moved in the same time to B D, but with motion uniformly accelerated, that is, with such motion, that the proportion of the spaces which are transmitted be always duplicate to that of the times, till the impetus acquired be B D equal to the strait line A C; and let the semiparabola A G D B be described. | Author's Epistle to the Reader
hobbes | if a strait line double to the chord of half the given arch be adapted from the beginning of the arch, and by how much the arch that is subtended by it is greater than the given arch, by so much a greater arch be subtended by another strait line, this strait line shall be equal to the first given arch. | Titles of the Chapters
hobbes | Supposing the strait line B V (in fig. 1) be equal to the arch of the quadrant B H D, and A V be connected cutting the arch B H D in I, it may be asked what proportion the arch B I has to the arch I D. | Titles of the Chapters
hobbes | Again, upon the centre A with the radius A _t_ let the arch _t u_ be drawn cutting A D in _u_; and the strait line A _u_ will be equal to the arch A Y. | Titles of the Chapters
hobbes | But that the arch B I and the radius B C are precisely equal, cannot (how true soever it be) be demonstrated, unless that be first proved which is contained in art. 1, namely, that the strait lines drawn from X through the equal parts of O F (produced to a certain length) cut off so many parts also in the tangent B C severally equal to the several arches cut off. | Titles of the Chapters
hobbes | Let now A B C D (in fig. 4) be a square; and with the radii A B, B C and D A, let the three quadrants A B D, B C A and D A C, be described; and let the strait lines E F and G H, drawn parallel to the sides B C and A B, divide the square A B C D into four equal squares. | Titles of the Chapters
hobbes | I will therefore leave this to be further searched into. For though it be almost out of doubt, that the strait line B P and the arch B M D are equal, yet that may not be received without demonstration; and means of demonstration the circular line admitteth none that is not grounded upon the nature of flexion, or of angles. | Titles of the Chapters
hobbes | The analyst that can solve these problems without knowing first the length of the arch B D, or using any other known method than that which proceeds by perpetual bisection of an angle, or is drawn from the consideration of the nature of flexion, shall do more than ordinary geometry is able to perform. | Titles of the Chapters
hobbes | But if the dimension of a circle cannot be found by any other method, then I have either found it, or it is not at all to be found. | Titles of the Chapters
hobbes | For Pappus, (before the 31st proposition of his fourth book) distinguishing and defining the several kinds of problems, says that "some are _plane_, others _solid_, and others _lineary_." | Titles of the Chapters
hobbes | The virtue of this kind of analysis consists in the changing and turning and tossing of rectangles and analogisms; and the skill of analysts is mere logic, by which they are able methodically to find out whatsoever lies hid either in the subject or predicate of the conclusion sought for. | Titles of the Chapters
hobbes | From hence it is manifest, that those two annual motions which Copernicus ascribes to the earth, are reducible to this one circular simple motion, by which all the points of the moved body are carried always with equal velocity, that is, in equal times they make equal revolutions uniformly. | Computation or Logic
hobbes | Having shown what simple motion is, I will here also set down some properties of the same. First, when a body is moved with simple motion in a fluid medium which hath no vacuity, it changes the situation of all the parts of the fluid ambient which resist its motion; I say there are no parts so small of the fluid ambient, how far soever it be continued, but do change their situation in such manner, as that they leave their places continually to other small parts that come into the same. | Computation or Logic
hobbes | Secondly, supposing the same simple motion in the air, water, or other fluid medium; the parts of the medium, which adhere to the moved body, will be carried about with the same motion and velocity, so that in what time soever any point of the movent finishes its circle, in the same time every part of the medium, which adheres to the movent, shall also describe such a part of its circle, as is equal to the whole circle of the movent. | Computation or Logic
hobbes | Thirdly, the same simple motion of a body placed in a fluid medium, congregates or gathers into one place such things as naturally float in that medium, if they be homogeneous; and if they be heterogeneous, it separates and dissipates them. | Computation or Logic
hobbes | Fourthly, in what time soever the movent, whose centre is A (in fig. 2) moved in K L N, shall, by any number of revolutions, that is, when the perimeters B I and K L N be commensurable, have described a line equal to the circle which passes through the points B and I; in the same time all the points of the floating body, whose centre is B, shall return to have the same situation in respect of the movent, from which they departed. | Computation or Logic
hobbes | In simple motion, if the body moved be of a spherical figure, it hath less force towards its poles than towards its middle to dissipate heterogeneous, or to congregate homogeneous bodies. | Computation or Logic
hobbes | If a fluid be moved with simple circular motion, all the points taken in it will describe their circles in times proportional to the distances from the centre. | Computation or Logic
hobbes | If in a fluid medium a spherical body be moved with simple circular motion, and in the same medium there float another sphere whose matter is not fluid, this sphere also shall be moved with simple circular motion. | Computation or Logic
hobbes | Action and reaction proceed in the same line, but from opposite terms. | Computation or Logic
hobbes | If a simple circular motion of a fluid body be hindered by a body which is not fluid, the fluid body will spread itself upon the superficies of that body. | Computation or Logic
hobbes | And as for the other two annual motions, they are the efficient cause of the earth's being carried about in the ecliptic in such manner, as that its axis is always kept parallel to itself. | Of Philosophy
hobbes | For if the circle a b c d (in fig. 3) be the ecliptic, whose centre is e, and diameter a e c; and the earth be placed in a, and the sun be moved in the little circle f g h i, namely, according to the order f, g, h, and i, it hath been demonstrated, that a body placed in a will be moved in the same order through the points of the ecliptic a, b, c, and d, and will always keep its axis parallel to itself. | Of Philosophy
hobbes | Now as I have demonstrated the simple annual motion of the earth from the supposition of simple motion in the sun; so from the supposition of simple motion in the earth may be demonstrated the monthly simple motion of the moon. | Of Philosophy
hobbes | For if the names be but changed, the demonstration will be the same, and therefore need not be repeated. | Of Philosophy
hobbes | That which makes this supposition of the sun's simple motion in the epicycle f g h i probable, is first, that the periods of all the planets are not only described about the sun, but so described, as that they are all contained within the zodiac, that is to say, within the latitude of about sixteen degrees; | Of Philosophy
hobbes | Secondly, that in the whole compass of the heavens there appears no other body from which the cause of this phenomenon can in probability be derived. | Of Philosophy
hobbes | Besides, I could not imagine that so many and such various motions of the planets should have no dependance at all upon one another. | Of Philosophy
hobbes | Otherwise, if they be not carried about by the sun and the earth, but that every planet hath been moved, as it is now moved, ever since it was made, there will be of their motions no cause natural. | Of Philosophy
hobbes | I may add besides, to confirm the probability of this simple motion, that as almost all learned men are now of the same opinion with Copernicus concerning the parallelism of the axis of the earth. | Of Philosophy
hobbes | I thought best therefore to retain this hypothesis of simple motion, and from it to derive the causes of as many of the phenomena as I could, and to let such alone as I could not deduce from thence. | Of Philosophy
hobbes | These things I found most bitterly excepted against. | Of Names
hobbes | Lastly, I have endeavoured to offend none, beside those whose principles these contradict, and whose tender minds are lightly offended by every difference of opinions. | Of Names
hobbes | Wherefore, if ye shall meet with some things which have more of sharpness, and less of certainty than they ought to have, since they are not so much spoken for the maintenance of parties as the establishment of peace, and by one whose just grief for the present calamities of his country may very charitably be allowed some liberty; it is his only request to ye, Readers, ye will deign to receive them with an equal mind. | Of Names
hobbes | Neither is there in this matter any exception of the persons with whom we contract; as if they keep no faith with others, or hold that none ought to be kept, or are guilty of any other kind of vice. | Of Names
hobbes | But the first and fundamental law of nature is, that peace is to be sought after, where it may be found; and where not, there to provide ourselves for helps of war. | Of Names
hobbes | Eloquence alone without wisdom, is the only faculty needful to raise seditions. | Of Proposition
hobbes | Legitimate kings therefore make the things they command just, by commanding them, and those which they forbid, unjust, by forbidding them. | Of Proposition
hobbes | That the judgment of good and evil belongs to private persons, is a seditious opinion. | Of Proposition
hobbes | Every man will dissemble his thoughts, and rather content himself with the present burthen than hazard a heavier weight. | Of Proposition
hobbes | But the most part of men consider nothing of these things. For they suffer the same thing with them who have a disease they call an incubus. | Of Proposition
hobbes | The most ancient of all God’s commands is, (Gen. ii. 17): Thou shalt not eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. | Of Proposition
hobbes | Now although particular subjects may sometimes contend in judgment, and go to law with the supreme magistrate; yet this is only then, when the question is not what the magistrate may, but what by a certain rule he hath declared he would do. | Of Proposition
hobbes | It is a common doctrine, that faith and holiness are not acquired by study and natural reason, but are always supernaturally infused and inspired into men. | Of Proposition
hobbes | The eloquence of ambitious men, concur to the dissolution of a commonweal. | Of Proposition